AN AERIAL BIVOUAC
THE LAST SURVIVOR’S STORY OF AN EXCITING ADVENTURETWENTY-SIX HOURS IN A BALLOON —THE LONGEST AERIAL VOYAGE, IN POINT OF HOURS, EVER MADE IN THE UNITED STATES, AND THE WORLD’S ENDURANCE RECORD UNTIL 19OO
BY EDGAR BEECHER BRONSON
ILLUSTRATED BY GEORGE VARIAN AND WITH FACSIMILES
HN the history of contests since man first began striving against his fellows, seldom has a record performance stood so long unbroken as that of the good airship “Barnum,” made thirty-three years ago. Of her captain and crew of five men, six all told, the writer remains the sole survivor, the only one who may live to see that record broken in this country.
The “Barnum” rose at 4 p.m. July 26, 1874, from New York and made her last landing 9 miles north of Saratoga at 6:07 p.m. of the 27th, thus finishing a voyage of a total elapsed time of 26 hours and 7 minutes. In the interim she made four landings, the first of no more than ten minutes, the second twenty, the third ten, the fourth thirty-five minutes, and these descents cost an expenditure of gas and ballast which shortened her endurance capacity by at least two or three hours.
Tracing on a map her actual route traversed, gives a total distance of something over 400 miles, which gave her the record of second place in the history of long-distance ballooning in this country, which she still holds.
So far as my knowledge of the art goes, and I have tried to read all of its history, the “Barnum’s” voyage of 26 hours and 7 minutes was then and remained the world’s endurance record until 1900, and it still remains, in point of hours up, the longest 624
balloon voyage ever made in the United States.*
The longest voyage in point of distance ever made in this country was that of John Wise and La Mountain, in the ’50’s, from St. Louis, Mo., to Jefferson County, N. Y., a distance credited under the old custom of a little less than 1200 miles, while the actual distance under the new rules is between 800 and 900 miles, the time being 19 hours. This voyage also remained, I believe, the world’s record for distance until 1900, and still remains the American record—and lucky, indeed, will be the aeronaut who beats it.
As for the endurance record, I hope and fully expect to see it beaten by probably several of the 15 contestants in the International Cup Race at St. Louis in October, for with skillful handling, no bad luck, no frequent wide changes of temperature and no necessity for descent arising from near approach to the sea, the race regulations provide for balloons capable of remaining up at least 50 or 60 hours.
And if staying up until the last bag of ballast is spent or a nearing coast line calls a halt can win the race, all American aero-
* Under new rules lately adopted “ endurance ” means the time which elapses between ascent and first landing, and “ distance ” means the length of an air line between the point of starting and the point of first landing. Formerly “endurance” meant the time of voyage on one inflation, irrespective of the number of landings, and “ distance ” meant the whole number of miles covered by the balloon, swept here and there by varying air currents. Obviously, the new rules are more sportemanlike, especially in the matter of “ distance ” ; tor, as the cleverest yachtsman brings his winning boat across the goal line by getting the best out of every shifting slant of wind, so the most skillful balloon pilot wins by superior knowledge of air currents.
Digitized by LjOOQie
A LAST SURVIVOR’S STORY
625
nauts feel sure they can safely depend that either Lieut. Lahm, Jas. C. McCoy, or Allan R. Hawley will score a credit as the Cup’s defender equal to the splendid record of Lahm as its original winner. But our champions have their work cut out; they know it and are preparing for it as best they may—they know the foreign entries include the most experienced and daring aeronauts now living.
P. T. Barnum’s “Great Roman Hippodrome,” now for many years Madison Square Garden, was never more densely crowded than on the afternoon of July 26, 1874. Early in the spring of that year Mr. Barnum had announced the building of a balloon larger than any theretofore made in this country. His purpose in building it was to attempt to break all previous records for time and distance, and he invited each of five daily city papers of that time to send representatives on the voyage. So when the day set for the ascent arrived, not only was the old Hippodrome packed to the doors, but adjacent streets and squares were solid black with people, as on a fete day like the Dewey parade.
Happily the day was one of brilliant sunshine and clear sky, with scarcely a cloud within the horizon.
The captain of the “Barnum” was Washington H. Donaldson, by far the most brilliant and daring professional aeronaut of his day, and a clever athlete and gymnast. For several weeks prior to the ascent of the “Barnum,” Donaldson had been making daily short ascents of an hour or two from the Hippodrome in a small balloon—as a feature of the performance. Sometimes he ascended in a basket, at other times with naught but a trapeze swinging beneath the concentrating ring of his balloon, himself in tights perched easily upon the bar of the trapeze. And when at a height to suit his fancy, of a thousand feet or more, time and again have I seen him do every difficult feat of trapeze work ever done above the certain security of a net.
Such was Donaldson, a man utterly fearless, but reckless only when alone, of a steadfast, cool courage and resource when responsible for the safety of others that made him the man out of a million best worth tying to in any emergency where a bold heart and ready wit may avert disaster.
Donaldson’s days were never dull.
The day preceding our ascent his balloon
was released with insufficient lifting power. Immediately he rose above neighboring roofs, a very high southeast wind caught him, and, before he had time to throw out ballast, drove his basket against the flagstaff on the Gilsey House with such violence that the staff was broken, the basket momentarily upset, dumping two ballast bags to the Broadway sidewalk and narrowly missing several pedestrians!
That he was not himself dashed to his death was a miracle. But to him this was no more than a bit unusual incident of the day’s work.
The reporters assigned as mates on this skylark in the “Barnum” were Alfred Ford, of The Graphic; Edmund Lyons, of The Sun; Samuel MacKeever, of The Herald; W. W. Austin, of The Worlds every one of these good fellows now dead these many years, alas! and myself, representing The Tribune.
Lyons, MacKeever and myself were novices in ballooning, but the two others had scored their bit of aeronautic experience.
Austin had made an ascent a year or two before at San Francisco, was swept out over the bay before he could make a landing, and, through some mishap, dropped into the water midway of the bay and well out toward Golden Gate, but was rescued by a passing boat.
Ford had made several balloon voyages, the most notable in ’73, in the great Graphic balloon.
After the voyage of the “Barnum” was first announced and it became known The Tribune would have a pass, everybody on the staff wanted to go. For weeks it was the talk of the office. Even grave gray beards of the editorial rooms were paying court for the preference to Mr. W. F. G. Shanks, that prince of an earlier generation of city editors, who of course controlled the assignment of the pass. But when at length the pass came, the enthusiasm and anxiety for the distinction waned, and it became plain the piece of paper “Good for One Aerial Trip” etc., must go begging.
At the time I was assistant night city editor, and a special detail to interview the Man in the Moon was was not precisely in the line of my normal duties. I was therefore greatly surprised (to put it conservatively) when, the morning before the ascent, Mr. Shanks, in whose family I was then living, routed me out of bed to say:
“ See here, Ted, you know Barnum’s bal-
Digitized by uooQle
Eacsimile and Exact Size of Afr. Eransan’s Pass and the Endorsement an the Each of it Affainting him to Ref resent “ The Tribune ”
loon starts to-morrow on her trial for the record, but what you don’t know is that we are in a hole. Before the ticket came every one wanted to go, from John R. G. Hassard down to the office boy. Now no one will-go—all have funked it, and I suppose you will want to follow suit!”
Thus diplomatically put, the hinted assignment was not to be refused without too much personal chagrin.
So it happened that about 3 30 p.m. the next day I arrived at the Hippodrome, loaded down with wraps and a heavy basket nigh bursting with good things to eat
626
and drink, which dear Mrs. Shanks had insisted on providing.
The “Barnum” was already filled with gas, tugging at her leash and swaying restlessly as if eager for the start. And right here, at first sight of the great sphere, I felt more nearly a downright fright than at any stage of the actual voyage; the balloon appeared such a hopelessly frail fabric to support even its own car and equipment. The light cord net enclosing the great gasbag looked aloft, where it towered above the roof, little more substantial than a film of lace, and appeared about as safe a proposition as to attempt to enmesh a lion in a cobweb.
Already my four mates for the voyage were assembled about the basket, and Donaldson himself was busy with the last details of the equipment. My weighty lunch basket had from my mates even a heartier reception than I received, but their joy over the prospect of delving into its generous depths was short-lived. The load as Donaldson had planned it was all aboard, weight carefully adjusted to what he considered a proper excess lifting power to carry us safely up above any chance of a collision with another flag-staff, like that he had the day before above the Gilsey House, and thus the basket and all its bounty (save only a small flask of brandy I smuggled into a hip pocket) were given to a passing acrobat.
At 4 p.m. the old Hippodrome rang with applause; a brilliant equestrian act had just been finished. Suddenly the applause ceased and that awful hush fell upon the vast audience which is rarely experienced except in the presence of death or of some
Digitized by uooQle
A LAST SURVIVOR’S STORY
627
impending disaster: we had been seen to enter the basket, and people held their breath.
Released, the ballon bounded 700 feet into the air, stood stationary for a moment, and then drifted northwest before the prevailing wind.
In this prodigious leap there was naught of the disagreeable sensation one experiences in a rapidly-rising elevator. Instead it rather seemed that we were standing motionless, stationary in space, and that the earth itself had gotten loose and was dropping away beneath us to depths unknown. Every cord and rope of the huge fabric was tensely taut, the basket firm and solid beneath our feet. Indeed, the balloon, with nothing more substantial in her construction than cloth and twine, and hempen ropes and willow wands (the latter forming the basket), has always, while floating in mid-air free of the drag-rope’s tricks, the rigid homogeneity of a rock, a solidity that quickly inspires the most timid with perfect confidence in her security.
Ballast was thrown out by Donaldson, a little. At Seventh Avenue and 43d Street our altitude was 2000 feet.
The great city lay beneath us like an unrolled scroll. White and dusty, the streets looked like innumerable strips of Morse telegraph paper—the people the dots, the vehicles the dashes.
Central Park, with its winding waters, was transformed into a superb mantle of dark green velvet splashed with silver, worthy of a royal f^te. Behind us lay the sea, a vast field of glittering silver. Before us lay a wide expanse of Jersey’s hills and dales that from our height appeared a plain, with many a reddish-gray splash upon its verdant stretches that indicated a village or a town.
Above and about us lay an inmeasurable space of which we were the only tenants, and over which we began to feel a grand sense of dominion that wrapped us as in royal ermine: if we were not lords of this aerial manor, pray then who were? Beneath us, lay—home. Should we ever see it again ? This thought I am sure came to all of us. I know it came to me. But the perfect steadiness of the balloon won our confidence, and we soon gave ourselves up to the gratification of our enviable position; and enviable indeed it was—for who has not envied the eagle his power to skim the tree-tops, to hover above Niagara, to circle
mountain peaks, to poise himself aloft and survey creation, or to mount into the zenith and gaze at the sun ?
Indeed our sense of confidence became such that, while sitting on the edge of the basket to reach and pass Donaldson a rope he asked for, I leaned so far over that the bottle of brandy resting in my hip pocket slipped out and fell into the Hudson.
Oddly, Ford, who was the most experienced balloonist of the party after Donaldson himself, seemed most nervous and timid, but it was naught but an expression of that constitutional trouble (dizziness) so many have when looking down from even the minor height of a step-ladder. In all the long hours he was with us, I do not recall his standing once erect in the basket, and when others of us perched upon the basket’s edge, he would beg us to come down. But mind, there was no lack of stark courage in Alfred Ford, sufficiently proved by the fact that he never missed a chance for an ascent.
But safe? Confident? Why, before we were up ten minutes, Lyons and MacKeever were sitting on the edge of the basket, with one hand holding to a stay, tossing out handfuls of small tissue paper circulars bearing “News from the Clouds.^ Many-colored, these little circulars as they fell beneath us looked like a flight of giant butterflies—and we kept on throwing out handfuls of them until our pilot warned us we were wasting so much weight we should soon be out of easy view of the earth! Indeed, the balance of the balloon is so extremely fine that when a single handful of these little tissue circulars was thrown out, ascent was shown on the dial of our aneroid barometer!
At 4:30 p.m. we drifted out over the Hudson at an altitude of 2500 feet. Here Donaldson descended from the airy perch on the concentrating ring wliich he had been occupying since our start, when one of us asked how long he expected the cruise to last. Donaldson replied that he hoped to be able to sail the “Barnum” at least three or four days.
“But,” he added, “I shall certainly be unable to carry all of you for so long a journey, and shall be compelled to drop you one by one. So you had best draw lots to settle whom I shall drop first, and in what order the rest shall follow.”
Sailing then 2500 feet above the earth, Lyons voiced a thought racing from my own brain for utterance when he blurted out:
Digitized by GooQle
628
AN AERIAL BIVOUAC
“What the deuce do you mean by ‘drop’ us?” Indeed, the question must have been on three other tongues as well, for Donaldson’s reply, “ Oh, descend to the earthand let you step out then,” was greeted by all five of
News from the Clouds.
|P. T. BARNUMrS
Great Roman Hippodrome
NEW YORK.
Ascension of the Experimental Series by
JPJROF. PONAZDSOJK
Facsimile and Exact Size of the Tissue-Paper Circulars which were thrown from the Balloon
us with a salvo of deep, lusty sighs of relief.
Then we drew lots for the order of our going, MacKeever drawing i, Austin 2, Lyons 3, Ford 4, and I 5.
Meantime, beneath us on the river vessels which from our height looked like the toy craft on the lake in Central Park were whistling a shrill salute that, toned down by the distance, was really not unmusical.
Having crossed the Hudson and swept above Weehawken, we found ourselves cruising northwest over the marshes of the Hackensack.
As the heat of the declining sun lessened, our cooling gas contracted and the balloon sank steadily until at 5:10 we were 250 feet above the earth and 100 feet of our great drag-rope was trailing on the ground.
Within hailing distance of people beneath us, a curious condition was observed. We could hear distinctly all they said at a height from which we could not make them understand a word: our voices had to fill a sphere of atmosphere; theirs, with the earth beneath them, only a hemisphere. Thus the modern megaphone is especially useful to aeronauts.
Hereabouts our fun began. Many countrymen thought the balloon running away with us and tried to stop and save us— always by grasping the drag-rope, bracing themselves and trying literally to hold us; when the slack of the rope straightened, they were tossed somersaults such as our pilot vowed no acrobat could equal. And yet the balance of the balloon is so fine that even a child of ten could pull us down, if only it had strength enough to withstand occasional momentary lifts off the ground. Occasionally one more clever would run and take a quick turn of the rope about a gate or fence—and then spend the rest of the evening gathering the scattered fragments and repairing the damage.
And when there was not fun enough below, Donaldson himself would take a hand and put his steed through some of her fancy paces—as when, approaching a large lake, he told us to hold tightly to the stays, let out gas and dropped us, bang! upon the lake. Running at a speed of 12 or 15 miles an hour, we hit the water with a tremendous shock, bounded 30 or 40 feet into the air, descended again and literally skipped in great leaps along the surface of the water, precisely like a well-thrown “skipping stone.” Then out went ballast and up and on we went, no worse for the fun beyond a pretty thorough wetting!
At 6:20 p.m. we landed on the farm of Garrett Harper in Bergen County, 26 miles from New York. After drinking our fill of milk at the farm house, we rose again and drifted north over Ramapo until, at 7135, a dead calm came upon us and we made another descent. We then found that we had landed near Bladentown on the farm of Miss Charlotte Thompson, a charming actress of the day whose “Jane Evre” and
Digitized by
Google
A LAST SURVIVOR’S STORY
629
“.Fanchon” are still pleasant memories to old theater-goers. Loading 6ur balloon with stones to safely anchor it, our party paid her a visit and was cordially received. An invitation to join us hazarded by Donaldson, Miss Thompson accepted with delight. I do not know if she is still living, but if she is, she cannot have forgotten her half-hour’s cruise in the good air-ship “Barnum,” wafted silently by a gentle evening breeze, the lovely panorama beneath her half hid, half seen through the purple haze of twilight.
After landing Miss Thompson at 8:18 we ascended for the night—for a night’s bivouac among the stars.
The moon rose early. We were soon sailing over the Highlands of the Hudson. Off in the east we could see the river, a winding ribbon of silver. We were running low, rarely more than 200 feet high. Below us the great drag-rope was hissing through meadows, roaring over fences, crashing through tree-tops. And all night long we were continually ascending and descending, sinking into valleys and rising over hills, following closely the contours of the local topography.
During the more equable temperature of night the balloon’s height is governed by the drag-rope. Leaving a range of hills and floating out over a valley, the weight of the drag-rope pulls the balloon down until the same length of rope is trailing through the valley that had been dragging on the hill. This habit of the balloon produces startling effects. Drifting swiftly toward a rocky, precipitous hillside against which it seems inevitable you must dash to your death, suddenly the trailing drag-rope reaches the lower slopes and you soar like a bird over the hill, often so low that the bottom of the basket swishes through the tree-tops.
But, while useful in conserving the balloon’s energy, the drag-rope is a source of constant peril to aeronauts, of terror to people on the earth and of damage to property. It has a nasty clinging habit, winding round trees or other objects, that may at any moment upset basket and aeronauts. On this trip our drag-rope tore sections out of scores of fences, upset many hay stacks, injured horses and cattle that tried to run across it, whipped off many a chimney, broke telegraph wires and seemed to take malicious delight in working some havoc with everything it touched.
At ten o’clock we sighted Cozzen’s Hotel, and shortly drifted across the parade ground of West Point, its huge battlemented gray walls making one fancy he was looking down into the inner court of some great medieval castle. Then we drifted out over the Hudson toward Cold Spring until, caught by a different current, we were swept along the course of the river.
Sailing oyer mid-stream and 200 feet above it, with the tall cliffs and mysterious, dark recesses of the Highlands on either hand, the waters beneath turned to a livid gray under the feeble light of the waning moon. No part of our voyage was more impressive, no scene more awe-inspiring. It was a region of such weird lights and grewsome shadows as no fancy could people with aught but gaunt goblins and dread demons, come down to us through generations untold, an unspent legacy of terror, from half-savage, superstitious ancestors.
Suddenly Ford spoke in a low voice: “Boys, I was in nine or ten battles of the Civil War, from Gaines’s Mill to Gettysburg, but in none of them was there a scene which impressed me as so terrible as this, no situation that seemed to me so threatening of irresistible perils.”
Nearing Fishkill at eleven, a land breeze caught and whisked us off eastward. At midnight we struck the town of Wappinger’s Falls—and struck it hard. Our visitation is doubtless remembered there yet. The town was in darkness and asleep. We were running low before a stiff breeze, half our drag-rope on the ground. The rope began to roar across roofs and upset chimneys with shrieks and crashes that set the folk within believing the end of the world had come. Instantly the streets were filled with flying white figures and the air with men’s curses and women’s screams. Three shots were fired beneath us. Two of our fellows said they heard the whistle of the balls, so Donaldson thought it prudent to throw out ballast and rise out of range.
Here the moon left us and we sailed on throughout the remainder of the night in utter darkness and without any extraordinary incident, all but the watch lying idly in the bottom of the basket viewing the stars and wondering what new mischief the dragrope might be planning.
The only duty of the watch was to lighten ship upon too near descent to the earth, and for this purpose a handful of Hippodrome
Digitized by uooQle
AN AERIAL BIVOUAC
630 circulars usually proved sufficient. Indeed, only eight pounds of ballast were used from the time we left Miss Thompson till dawn, barring a half-sack spent in getting out of range of the Wappinger’s Falls sportsmen who seemed to want to bag us.
Ford and Austin were assigned as the lookout from 12:00 to 2:00, Lyons and myself from 2:00 to 3:00, and Donaldson and MacKeever from 3:00 to 4:00.
From midnight till 3 :oo a.m. Donaldson slept peaceful as a baby, curled up in the basket with a sand-bag for a pillow.
The rest of us slept little through the night and talked less, each absorbed in the reflections and speculations inspired by our novel experience.
At the approach of dawn we had the most unique and extraordinary experience ever given to man. The balloon was sailing low in a deep valley. To the east of us the Berkshires rose steeply to summits probably 1500 feet above us. Beneath us a little village lay, snuggled cosily between two small meeting brooks, all dim under the mists of early morning and the shadows of the hills. No flush of dawn yet lit the sky. Donaldson had been consulting his watch. Suddenly he rose and called, pointing eastward across the range:
“Watch, boys! Look there!”
He then quickly dumped overboard half the contents of a ballast bag. Flying upward like an arrow, the balloon soon shot up above the mountain top. When, lo! a miracle! The phenomenon of sunrise was reversed! We our very selves instead had risen on the sun! There he stood, full and round, peeping at us through the trees crowning a distant Berkshire hill, as if startled by our temerity.
Shortly thereafter, when we had descended to our usual level and were running swiftly before a stiff breeze over a rocky hillside, Donaldson yelled:
“Hang on, boys, for your lives!”
The end of the drag-rope had gotten a hitch about a large tree limb. Luckily Donaldson had seen it in time to warn us, else we had there finished our careers. We had barely time to seize the stays when the rope tautened with a shock that nearly turned the basket upside down, spilled out our water-bucket and some ballast, left MacKeever and’myself hanging in space by our hands and the other four on the lower side of the basket, scrambling to save them-
selves. Instantly, of course, the basket righted and dropped back beneath us.
And then began a terrible struggle.
The pressure of the wind bore us down within 100 feet of the ragged rocks. Groaning under the strain, the rope seemed ready to snap. Like a huge leviathan trapped in a net, the gas-bag writhed; twisted, bulged, shrank, gathered into a ball and sprang fiercely out. The loose folds of canvas sucked up until half the netting stood empty, and then fold after fold darted out and back with all the angry menace of a serpent’s tongue and with the ominous crash of musketry.
It seemed the canvas must inevitably burst and we be dashed to death. But Donaldson was cool and smiling, and, taking the only precaution possible, stood with a sheath-knife ready to cut away the drag-rope and relieve us of its weight in case our canvas burst.
Happily the struggle was brief. The limb that held us snapped, and the balloon sprang, forward in mighty bounds that threw us off our feet and tossed the great drag-rope about like a whip-lash. But we were free, safe, and our stout vessel soon settled down to the velocity of the wind.
By this time we all were beginning, to feel hungry, for we had supped the night before in mid-air from a lunch basket that held more delicacies than substantials. So Donaldson proposed a descent and began looking for a likely place. At last he chose a little village, which upon near approach we learned lay in Columbia County of our own good state.
We called to two farmers to pull us down—no easy task in the rather high wind then blowing. They grasped the rope and braced themselves as had others the night before, and presently were flying through the air in prodigious if ungraceful somersaults. Amazed but unhurt, they again seized the rope and got a turn about a stout board fence, only to see a section or two of the fence fly into the air as if in pursuit of us.
Presently the heat of the rising sun expanded our gas and sent us up again 2000 feet, making breakfast farther off than ever. Thus, it being clear that we must sacrifice either our stomachs or our gas, Donaldson held open the safety valve until we were once more safely landed on mother earth, but not until after we had received a pretty
Digitized by GooQle
“MANY COUNTRYMEN THOUGHT THE BALLOON RUNNING AWAY WITH US AND TRIED TO STOP AND SAVE US—ALWAYS BY GRASPING THE DRAG-ROPE, BRACING THEMSELVES AND TRYING LITERALLY TO HOLD US, WHEN, THE SLACK OF THE ROPE STRAIGHTENED, THEY WERE TOSSED SOMERSAULTS SUCH AS OUR PILOT VOWED NO ACROBAT COULD EQUAL ”-Page 628
Digitized by LiOOQle
AN AERIAL BIVOUAC
632 severe pounding about, for such a high wind blew that the anchor was slow in holding.
This landing was made at 5:24 a.m. on the farm of John W. Coons near the village of Greenport, four miles from Hudson City, and about 130 miles from New York.
Here our pilot decided our vessel must be lightened of two men, and thus the lot drawn the night before compelled us to part, regretfully, with Mac Keever of The Herald and Austin of The World. Ford, however, owing allegiance to an afternoon paper, The Graphic, and always bursting with honest journalistic zeal for a “ beat,” saw an opportunity to win satisfaction greater even than that of keeping on with us. So he, too, left us here, with the result that The Graphic published a full story of the voyage up to this point — Saturday afternoon, the 25th. The Herald and World trailed along for second place in their Sunday editions, while Sun and Tribune readers had to wait till Monday morning for such “News from the Clouds ” as Lyons and I had to give them—for wires were not used as freely then as now.
Our departing mates brought us a rare good breakfast from Mr. Coons’s generous kitchen—a fourteen-quart tin pail well-nigh filled with good things, among them two currant pies on yellow earthen plates, gigantic in size, pale of crust, though anything but anaemic of contents. Lyons finished nearly the half of one before our reascent, to his sorrow—for scarcely were we off the earth before he developed a colic that seemed to interest him more, right up to the finish of the trip, than the scenery.
Bidding our mates good-bye, we prepared to reascend. Many farmers had been about us holding to our ropes and leaning on the basket, and later we realized we had not taken in sufficient ballast to offset the weight of the three men who left us.
Released, the balloon sprang upward at a pace that all but took our breath away. Instantly the earth disappeared beneath us. We saw Donaldson pull the safety valve wide open, draw his sheath knife ready to cut the drag-rope, standing rigid, with his eyes riveted upon the aneroid barometer. The hand of the barometer was sweeping across the dial at a terrific rate. I glanced at Donaldson and saw him smile. Then I looked back at the barometer and saw the hand had stopped—at 10,200 feet! How long we were ascending we did not know.
Certain it is that the impressions described were all there was time for, and that when Donaldson turned and spoke we saw his lips move but could hear no sound. Our speed had been such that the pressure of the air, upon the tympanum of the ear, left us deaf for some minutes. We had made a dash of two miles into cloudland and had accomplished it, we three firmly believed, in little more than a minute!
Presently Donaldson observed the anchor and grapnel had come up badly clogged with sod, and a good heavy tug he and I had of it to pull them in, for Lyons was still much too busy with his currant pie to help us. Nor indeed were the currant pies yet done with us, for at the end of our tug at the anchor rope, I found I had been kneeling very precisely in the middle of pie No. 2, and had contrived to absorb most of it into the knees of my trousers. Thus at the end of the day, come to Saratoga after all shops were closed, I had to run the gauntlet of the porch and office crowd of visitors at the United States Hotel in a condition of costume that only needed moccasins and a war bonnet to make me a tolerable imitation of an Indian.
We remained aloft at an altitude of two to two and one-half miles for three hours and a half, stayed there until the silence became intolerable, until the buzz of a fly or the croak of a frog would have been music to our ears. Here was absolute silence, the silence of the grave and death—a silence never to be experienced by living man in any terrestrial condition.
Occasionally the misty clouds in which we hung enshrouded parted beneath us and gave us glimpses of the distant earth, opened and disclosed landscapes of infinite beauty set in gray nebulous frames.
Once we passed above a thunderstorm, saw the lightning play beneath us, felt our whole fabric tremble at its shock—and were glad enough when we had left it well behind.
Seen from a great height, the earth looked to be a vast expanse of dark-green velvet, sometimes shaded to a deeper hue by cloudlets floating beneath the sun, splashed here with the silver and there with the gold garniture reflected from rippling waters.
Toward noon we descended beneath the region of clouds into the realm of light and life, and found ourselves hovering above the Mountain House of the Catskills. And thereabouts we drifted in cross-currents until nearly 4:00 p.m., when a heavy south-
Digitized by GooQle