THE 

BOY  EMIGRANTS 

BY 

NOAH   BROOKS 

WITH     ILLUSTRATIONS     BY 

H.  T.   DUNN 


NEW  YORK 
CHARLES    SCRIBNER'S    SONS 

1920 


'  YORK     1 

if 


B 


CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

I.    Hard  Times  at  Home 3 

H.    Great  Preparations ii 

HI.     Camping  Out 24 

IV.     "The  Jumping-off  Place" 36 

V.    New  Partners       52 

VI.    Adrift 68 

Vn.    Trouble  in  the  Camp 84 

Vni.     Some  New  Acquaintances 98 

IX.     A  Misadventure no 

X.    Among  the  Buffaloes 126 

XL     In  which  the  Boston  Boys  Lose  an  Old  Friend 

and  Find  a  Ne-v  Friend    ^ 142 

Xll.    In  the  Heart  of  ikk  Continent 157 

XIII.  Laughter  and  Teaks 171 

XIV.  In  Mormondom 186 

XV.    A  Great  Disaster 204 

XVL    In  the  Desert       218 

vii 


vIII  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

XVII.  The  Golden  Land 235 

XVIII.  Crowbait  Gulch 249 

XIX.  Gold 262 

XX.  House-Building 273 

XXI.  An  Expedition,  and  What  Came  of  It      .    .  284 

XXII.  Privation  and  Deliverance       295 

XXIII.  Luck  in  Streaks 307 

XXIV.  Wandering  Once  More 316 

XXV.  A  Separation  and  a  Calamity 328 

XXVI.  A  Strange  Case 340 

XXVII.  News  and  Discoveries 349 

XXVIII.  Developments 361 

XXIX.  Reckoning  Up  the  Gains 372 

XXX.  Homeward  Bound 378 


ILLUSTRATIONS 

Arthur  built  once  more  his  golden  dream     ....      Frontispiece 

FACING  PAGE 

"Bread!  it  ain't  bread;  it's  flour  paste" 30 

A  party  of  Pawnees  gazed  with  great  solemnity    ....  100 

Behind  them,  like  a  rising  tide,  flowed  the  buff"aloes  in  surges  140 

A  white-haired  old  man  prayed  by  the  open  grave    .     .     .  182 

"Get  out  of  that  corral,  or  I'll  shoot  you  !"  he  cried      .     .     .  200 

Mont  thought  of  the  stars  shining  over  his  New  England 

home,  far  away 226 

The  horse  was  now  obliged  to  wallow  in  a  deep  mass  of  snow  292 

Like  a  bird  of  prey,  the  man  swiftly  ran  and  watched    .     .     .  336 

"They  saw  you  sitting  in  the  road,  wounded,  and  they  brought 

you  home"       344 


THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 


CHAPTER  I 

HARD   TIMES    AT   HOME 

"It's  no  use  talking,  Arty,  there  are  too  many  of 
us.     The  pie  don't  go  round." 

Arthur  smiled  a  little  ruefully  as  he  added  to  Bar- 
nard's complaint:  "And  Sam  and  Oliver  wear  their 
clothes  all  out  before  they  can  be  made  over  for  me." 

Barnard — whose  whole  name,  by  the  way,  was 
Barker  Barnard  Stevens — showed  his  confidence  in 
his  younger  brother's  judgment  when  he  said:  "As 
we  are  a  too  numerous  family,  what  is  to  be  done  about 
it.?     Kill  off  a  few?" 

Arthur  was  one  of  seven — great  hearty  boys  all  of 
them.  His  trousers  were  inherited  from  his  elder 
brother  Sam,  and  had  been  "turned"  in  the  legs  and 
were  already  inconveniently  short.  With  an  impatient 
little  jerk  at  the  knee  of  one  of  these  objectionable  legs, 
he  said:  "Let's  emigrate!" 

Barnard,  five  years  older,  and  more  cautious,  asked: 
"Whereto?" 

"Oh,  anywhere,  so  that  we  have  a  chance  to  strike 

3 


4  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

out  for  ourselves.  Father  emigrated  from  Vermont 
with  all  of  us  young  ones,  and  why  shouldn't  we  put 
out  for  the  Far  West,  I'd  like  to  know?  It  isn't  so 
far  from  Illinois  to  Somewhereelse  now,  as  it  was  from 
Vermont  to  Illinois  when  we  were  brought  here." 

"A  great  deal  you  know  about  it,  young  Arthur  boy. 
Why,  you  were  only  six  years  old  when  we  came  here." 

"All  right,  Barney,  but  I'm  fifteen  now,  and  have 
not  studied  geography  for  nothing." 

"Boys!  boys!  it's  time  to  turn  in.  You've  got  to 
go  down  to  Turner's  to-morrow  after  those  grain- 
sacks;  and  your  ma  says  there's  no  rye-meal  in  the 
house  for  Saturday's  baking." 

This  was  the  voice  of  Farmer  Stevens  from  the  porch. 
The  boys  had  been  sitting  on  the  rail-fence  in  front  of 
the  house  while  the  twilight  fell.  The  evening  was 
tranquil  but  gloomy,  and  they  had  taken  a  somewhat 
sombre  view  of  family  affairs,  considering  what  cheery, 
hopeful  young  fellows  they  were. 

But  it  was  a  fact  that  there  were  too  many  of  them. 
There  were  four  boys  older  than  Arthur,  two  younger, 
and  a  baby  sister.  Since  the  Stevens  family  had  settled 
in  Northern  Illinois,  things  had  gone  wrong  all  over  the 
country.  First,  the  chinch-bug  came  upon  them  and 
ate  up  their  crop — and  it  was  not  much  of  a  crop, 
either.  Then  they  had  a  good  year  and  felt  encour- 
aged;   but    next   there    fell    a    sort   of  blight   on   the 


HARD  TIMES  AT  HOME  5 

Rock  River  region.  It  was  dry  in  seeding-time  and 
wet  in  harvest.  The  smut  got  into  the  wheat — and 
nobody  planted  anything  besides  wheat  in  those  days. 
So,  what  with  rust,  mildew,  and  other  plagues,  poor 
Farmer  Stevens  was  left  without  much  more  than 
grain  enough  to  feed  his  growing  boys.  His  cattle 
went  hungry  or  to  the  butchers.  From  year  to  year 
things  alternated  between  bad  and  worse.  It  was  dis- 
couraging. 

As  the  boys  climbed  down  from  their  perch,  Barnard 
said  to  his  father: 

"Arty  and  I  are  going  to  emigrate." 

"Yes,  to  Turner's  mill;  and  be  sure  you  bring  back 
all  those  grain-sacks,  Arthur." 

But  the  watchful  mother  heard  the  remark,  and  said, 
as  the  boys  lumbered  upstairs  to  bed: 

"Barnard  was  cut-up  to-night  because  he  missed  his 
piece  of  pie.  Joe  Griffin  was  here,  and  it  did  not  go 
round." 

"Well,  I  must  say,  mother,"  rephed  Farmer  Stevens, 
"it's  hard  Hnes  when  the  boys  fall  out  with  their  prov- 
ender; but  Barney  is  dreadful  notional,  and  he's  out 
of  conceit  with  Illinois." 

"Yes,  father,  he  is  a  restless  boy,  and  he  and  Arty 
set  so  much  by  each  other;  when  one  goes  the  other 
will." 

The  poor  mother  laid  her  sleeping  baby  in  the  cradle, 


6  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

and  sat  for  a  moment  looking  out  over  the  dim  land- 
scape beyond  the  open  window. 

Sugar  Grove  was  a  small  settlement  on  a  broken  rise 
of  ground.  Behind  stood  a  dense  grove  of  sugar- 
maples,  extending  two  miles  east  and  west.  In  front 
of  the  few  houses  and  the  row  of  wheat-farms  was  a 
broad  valley,  belted  with  trees,  and  through  which 
Rock  River  wound  In  big  curves,  now  faint  in  the  early 
summer  night.  The  crop  was  mostly  in  the  ground, 
and  the  little  farm  looked  tidy.  But  the  fences  were 
not  in  good  repair,  the  house  had  never  been  painted, 
and  the  whole  place  seemed  pinched  and  poor. 

"This  isn't  the  'rich  West,'  after  all,"  sighed  Mrs. 
Stevens  sadly;  and  the  tears  gathered  in  her  eyes  as 
she  thought  of  her  noble  boys  growing  up  in  such  strait 
circumstances,  with  defeat  and  poverty  continually 
before  them.  "So  the  pie  wouldn't  go  round .f*  Poor 
Barney!"  The  mother  laughed  a  sad  httle  laugh  to 
herself,  as  she  thought  of  Barnard's  grim  discontent. 

Returning  from  Turner's,  next  day,  Arthur  brought 
the  family  mail,  which  had  been  left  at  the  mill  by 
some  of  the  neighbors  down  the  road,  on  their  way 
home  from  town.  It  was  not  a  heavy  mail;  and,  as 
Arthur  jogged  along  on  Old  Jim,  sitting  among  the 
grain-sacks,  he  opened  the  village  newspaper.  The 
Lee  County  Banner  was  published  once  a  week,  and 
the  local  news  usually  occupied  half  a  column.     This 


HARD  TIMES  AT  HOME  7 

week  that  important  part  of  the  paper  was  led  off  with 
a  long  paragraph  headed  "Latest  News  from  Cali- 
fornia! Arrival  of  Joshua  Gates,  Esq.!"  Arthur  held 
his  breath  and  read  as  follows: 

We  take  great  pleasure  in  informing  our  friends  and  patrons,  as 
well  as  the  public  generally,  that  Joshua  Gates,  Esq.,  our  esteemed 
and  highly  respected  fellow-citizen,  has  just  arrived  from  Cali- 
fornia, overland.  Accompanied  by  a  bold  and  adventurous  band 
of  Missourians,  he  has  crossed  the  continent  in  the  unprecedented 
time  of  sixty-five  days,  stopping  in  Mormondom  two  days  to  re- 
cruit. Our  fortunate  fellow-citizen  brings  ample  confirmation  of 
the  richness  of  the  gold  discoveries  of  California.  To  say  that  he 
brings  tangible  proof  of  all  this  would  be  to  put  the  case  in  its 
mildest  form.  Our  hands  have  handled  and  our  optics  have  gazed 
upon  the  real  stuff  brought  by  our  enterprising  fellow-citizen,  who 
assures  us  that  the  half  has  not  been  told  us,  and  that  he  proposes 
to  return  as  soon  as  possible  to  what  may  now  with  extreme  pro- 
priety be  called  the  Land  of  Gold,  where  we  are  told  that  a  "strike" 
of  hundreds  of  thousands  is  a  common  thing,  and  any  industrious 
man  may  make  from  $15  to  $1,500  per  day.  We  welcome  our  dis- 
tinguished fellow-citizen  home  again,  and  congratulate  him  on  his 
well-deserved  success.  We  append  a  few  of  the  reigning  prices  in 
California:  Flour,  $15  per  bbl.;  pork,  $1.50  per  lb.;  fresh  beef, 
$1.00  to  $1.50  ditto;  mining  boots,  $50  per  pr.;  quinine,  $$0  per 
oz.;   newspapers,  anywhere  from  $1.00  to  $5.00  each. 

"Gold!  Gold!  Gold!  Gold! 
Bright  and  yellow,  hard  and  cold. 
Molten,  graven,  hammer'd  and  rolled; 
Heavy  to  get  and  light  to  hold." 

Arthur  did  not  stop  to  read  the  poetry;  he  folded  up 
the  paper  with  emphasis,  jammed  it  into  his  pocket. 


8  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

pulled  his  straw  hat  tightly  on  his  head,  and  said: 
"The  very  thing!"  Old  Jim,  who  had  been  browsing 
off  the  hazel  brush  as  his  young  rider  absorbed  the 
news,  looked  around  with  meek  surprise. 

"Yes,  you  old  rascal,  that's  the  very  thing!  We'll 
go  to  California,  my  boy;  and  when  we  are  picking  up 
the  diamonds  and  gold-dust,  won't  we  tell  Old  Turner 
to  go  hang  for  an  old  hunks!" 

Jim  neighed  and  pricked  up  his  ears,  just  as  if  he 
understood  that  the  miller  had  taken  more  toll  from 
the  rye  than  young  Arthur  thought  he  was  entitled  to. 

"Digging  up  gold  in  California!  Hey,  Jim!"  and 
Arthur  went  cantering  up  the  road  as  blithely  as  if  he 
were  already  in  the  Land  of  Gold. 

"Say,  mother.  Josh  Gates  has  got  back." 

"Has  that  worthless,  miserable  vagabond  come  back 
to  plague  his  poor  old  mother  once  more?"  asked  the 
plain-speaking  Mrs.  Stevens.  "Well,  well,  he's  the  bad 
penny,  that's  certain  sure." 

"But  he's  rich — got  lots  of  gold  from  California — 
and  the  Banner  says  he's  a  distinguished  fellow-citi- 
zen," remonstrated  Arthur,  who  suddenly  reflected, 
however,  that  Josh  Gates  had  gone  off  "between  two 
days,"  when  he  departed  from  Lee  County,  and  that 
he  had  been  indicted  for  stealing  hens,  and  that  his 
former  reputation  in  the  town  of  Richardson  was  not 
at  all  fragrant. 


HARD  TIMES  AT  HOME  9 

Arthur  was  a  little  crestfallen,  but  he  handed  Sam 
the  paper,  and  said: 

"Perhaps  Gates  is  a  Har,  as  well  as  a  chicken-stealer; 
but  you  see  the  newspaper  man  says  that  he  has  seen 
his  gold-dust;   so  there!" 

"Oh,  pshaw!"  said  his  mother,  returning  to  her  wash- 
tub,  "these  gold  stories  about  California  are  all  got  up 
to  help  the  shipping  people.  They  are  selling  their 
vessels,  and  advertising  to  take  folks  out  at  great 
prices.     So  the  Chicago  papers  say!" 

"But  Josh  Gates  came  back  overland,  ma,"  said  the 
boy. 

"  'Tis  my  opinion  that  that  scamp  has  never  been 
farther  west  than  Iowa,"  cried  Sam,  holding  up  the 
paper  with  a  knowing  air.  "Hi  Fender  saw  him  over 
to  Council  Bluffs  last  fall,  sweeping  out  a  billiard  saloon. 
He  went  from  there  to  St.  Louis  as  deck-hand  on  a 
steamboat.     He  ain't  worth  shucks." 

Having  so  said,  Sam  went  on  mending  his  ox-yoke, 
as  if  the  case  were  finally  settled. 

That  day  Arthur  and  Barnard  worked  together  in 
the  field,  putting  in  a  second  crop  where  the  first  seed- 
ing had  been  winter-killed.  They  talked  over  and 
over  again  the  chances  of  the  journey  to  California, 
the  story  of  the  gold  discoveries,  the  truth  or  false- 
hood of  Josh  Gates,  and  all  the  ways  and  means  of 
getting  across  the  continent.     About  this  last  branch  of 


lo  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

the  subject  there  was  a  great  deal  of  doubt.  It  would 
cost  much  money. 

"But  only  think,  Barney,  how  grand  'twould  be  if 
we  could  come  home  in  a  year  or  two  with  lots  of  gold, 
pay  off  the  mortgage,  build  a  new  house,  and  fix  things 
comfortable  for  the  folks  during  the  rest  of  their  lives! 
Wouldn't  that  pay?"  And  Arthur,  in  a  great  glow  of 
anticipation,  scattered  the  seed-wheat  far  and  wide  by 
big  handfuls. 

"Take  care  there,  boy!  you're  throwing  away  that 
grain,"  grumbled  Barnard,  who  was  twenty  years  old, 
and  a  little  less  enthusiastic  than  Arthur.  But  he 
added,  "I  do  just  believe  there's  gold  in  California; 
and  if  we  can  only  figure  it  out  to  satisfy  the  folks, 
we'll  go  there  by  hook  or  crook." 

"It's  a  whack!"  cried  Arthur,  who  was  ardent,  and 
a  little  slangy. 


CHAPTER  II 

GREAT    PREPARATIONS 

*'Now,  if  I  was  in  a  story-book,"  said  Arthur  to 
himself  one  day,  "I  should  find  a  wallet  in  the  road 
with  one  hundred  and  fifty  dollars  in  it."  One  hun- 
dred and  fifty  dollars  was  just  about  the  sum  which 
the  boys  had  found  they  needed  to  complete  an  out- 
fit for  California.  Without  any  formal  declaration 
of  their  intention,  or  any  expression  of  opinion  from 
father  and  mother,  Barnard  and  Arthur  had  gone  on 
with  their  plans;  but  these  were  all  in  the  air  so  far. 
The  details  worried  them  a  great  deal. 

There  was  a  spare  wagon  on  the  farm  which  might  be 
fixed  up  and  mended  well  enough  to  last  for  the  jour- 
ney across  the  Plains.  Old  Jim  could  be  taken  from 
the  plow;  but  they  must  have  another  horse,  some 
mining  tools,  harness,  and  provisions.  From  a  New 
England  newspaper  they  cut  a  list  of  articles  con- 
sidered necessary  for  the  journey.  It  was  fascinating, 
but  formidable.     This  is  the  way  it  ran: 

I  Wagon $125  oo 

Wagon  Cover •     12  00 

$137  00 


12  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

Brought  forward $I37  oo 

2  Horses  or  Mules 150  oo 

Harness 60  00 

Tent 25  00 

4  Picks 5  00 

2  Shovels 4  40 

4  Gold-Pans i  00 

2  Axes 5  50 

8  Cwt.  Flour 24  00 

1  Bush.  Beans i  25 

2  Bush.  Corn  Meal 4  75 

I  Cwt.  Pork 10  00 

4  Cwt.  Bacon 44  00 

I  Cwt.  Sugar 8  00 

50  Lbs.  Rice 5  50 

60  Lbs.  Coffee 10  80 

Sundry  Small  Stores 10  00 

Ammunition 12  00 

Medicines 5  00 

Total $523  20 

*More  than  five  hundred  dollars!"  Arthur  would 
say,  over  and  over  again.  "More  than  five  hundred 
dollars,  and  we  haven't  five  hundred  cents!" 

By  degrees,  however,  the  boys  had  managed  to 
reduce  the  sum  total  somewhat.  The  wagon,  they 
thought,  might  be  taken  out  of  the  list.  So  might 
one  of  the  horses,  if  Old  Jim  could  be  put  instead. 
Then  the  sixty  dollars  for  harness  could  be  brought 
down  to  less  than  half  that  amount.  They  could  make 
some  of  the  old  harness  on  the  farm  available — with 
their  father's  consent.  They  could  take  less  pork  and 
more  bacon. 


GREAT  PREPARATIONS  13 

*'I  hate  pork,  anyhow,"  said  Barnard,  who  had 
worked  one  season  of  haying  with  a  neighbor,  and  had 
been  fed  on  fried  pork  and  hot  bread  three  times  a 
day  for  five  weeks. 

"But  we  can't  have  hams  and  shoulders,"  objected 
Arthur.     "Don't  they  cost  a  good  deal?" 

"Side  meat's  the  thing,  Arty.  No  bones  in  it;  easy 
to  carry,  and  cheap.  Nine  cents  a  pound;  and  we've 
got  a  lot  in  the  smoke-house,  you  know,  that  perhaps 
father  will  let  us  have  some  from." 

"And  this  fellow  has  got  down  bacon  at  eleven  cents 
a  pound!"  said  Arthur,  with  great  disdain.  "And 
what  he  should  put  in  'Sunday  small  stores'  at  ten 
dollars  for,  is  more  than  I  know.  What  are  'Sunday 
small  stores,'  anyhow?" 

"Ho,  you  goose! — those  are  *  sundry  small  stores.' 
You've  made  an  a  out  of  an  r;  that's  all.  'Sunday 
small  stores!'  Well,  that's  a  good  one!  He's  guessed 
at  the  lot:  and  I  guess  it's  high  for  a  little  salt,  spice, 
and  such  knick-knacks.  Besides,  there's  five  dollars 
for  medicine.  Who's  going  to  be  sick  on  the  Plains, 
I'd  Hke  to  know?" 

A  multitude  of  such  discussions  as  these,  with  much 
contriving  and  figuring,  put  the  young  emigrants  where 
they  could  see  their  way  clear  to  an  outfit — if  they  had 
only  one  hundred  and  fifty  dollars  in  cash.  That  was 
a  big  sum;    and,  even  with  this,  they  had  calculated 


14  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

on  obtaining  permission  to  take  from  the  farm  many 
things  which  were  needed. 

The  boys  studied  over  the  ways  and  means  of  getting 
to  Cahfornia  with  real  enjoyment.  Hubert,  the  big 
brother,  who  was  employed  in  a  store  in  town,  and 
came  home  on  Sundays,  declared  that  Arthur  carried 
the  printed  slip  from  the  Plowman  to  bed  with  him. 
Nevertheless,  the  whole  family  joined  in  the  debate 
over  the  propriety  of  taking  corn-meal  on  such  a  long 
journey,  or  the  cost  of  extra  boots  and  clothing  for  the 
travelers,  with  a  glow  of  satisfaction.  It  was  a  nov- 
elty, and,  though  none  but  Barney  and  Arthur  really 
thought  anything  would  come  of  it,  all  the  boys  dis- 
cussed the  route,  outfit,  and  dangers  of  the  way  at 
morning,  noon,  and  night. 

They  made  out  new  lists  of  things  indispensable  for 
the  trip,  and  fingered  these  with  a  certain  sort  of  fas- 
cination for  the  items  and  figures  which  was  quite 
satisfactory.  As  Sam  said  one  day,  they  had  the  fun 
of  talking  about  it,  even  if  nobody  should  go. 

The  careworn  mother  looked  on  and  listened.  She 
could  not  contentedly  think  of  these  dear  young  fledg- 
lings of  hers  flying  so  far  away  from  the  home  nest. 
There  were  dreadful  tales  of  Indians  on  the  way,  dis- 
ease, and  death,  and  violence  and  crime  in  the  gold 
diggings.  What  would  become  of  her  boys,  alone  and 
unfriended,  in  that  rude  country,  even  if  they  should 


GREAT  PREPARATIONS  i^ 

ever  reach  it?  She  looked  at  Arthur's  golden  head, 
deep  in  the  mysteries  of  the  cookery-book,  which  he 
was  studying  for  future  use;  and  she  sighed  and  smiled 
together.  Could  she  trust  her  boy  to  the  chances  of  a 
roving  Hfe  on  the  Plains?  Would  he  find  there  the 
romance  and  fun  which  he  anticipated? 

"If  I  was  only  in  a  story-book  now,  I  should  find  a  wal- 
let in  the  road  with  one  hundred  and  fifty  dollars  in  it." 

Arthur  had  said  this  to  himself  a  great  many  times. 
This  time  as  he-  lay  at  full  length  on  top  of  the  hill 
behind  the  house,  looking  off  down  the  valley  of  the 
Rock,  he  built  once  more  his  golden  dream.  Beyond 
the  brown,  newly-plowed  fields,  suggesting  only  hard 
work;  beyond  the  tall  cottonwoods  that  bordered  the 
stream,  and  beyond  the  pale  blue  line  where  the  valley 
of  the  Rock  River  melted  into  the  sky,  was  the  prom- 
ised land.  So  far  away  it  was!  Yet  he  could  see,  he 
thought,  the  gay  caravans  pressing  on  to  the  golden 
shores  of  the  Pacific.  There  were  long  trains  of  brave 
men  with  wagons,  horses,  and  arms.  There  were  the 
roHing  prairies  dotted  with  buffalo,  deer,  and  strange 
game.  The  red  man  lurked  by  the  river,  but  fled  away 
to  the  snow-capped  mountains  as  the  white  conqueror 
came  on  apace.  The  grand  Rocky  Mountains,  whose 
devious  line  he  had  painfully  studied  on  his  school- 
map,  rose  majestically  on  the  horizon,  lying  like  clouds 
against  the  sky. 


i6  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

How  mean  and  narrow  the  little  farm  below  him 
looked!  How  small  the  valley  and  how  wearisome  the 
plowed  fields!  He  remembered  that  his  back  had 
ached  with  the  planting  of  that  ten-acre  lot;  and  he 
remembered,  too,  how  his  father  had  said  that  little 
boys'  backs  never  ached;  that  little  boys  thought  their 
backs  ached,  but  they  didn't.  Arthur  turned  his  eyes 
westward  again  with  a  vague  and  restless  longing. 
Surely,  there  was  a  place  for  him  somewhere  outside 
the  narrow  valley,  where  he  could  make  a  name,  see 
the  world,  and  learn  something  besides  plowing,  sow- 
ing, harvesting,  and  saving. 

"One  hundred  and  fifty  dollars,"  he  murmured  once 
more,  as  his  eyes  fell  on  Hiram  Fender,  slowly  plodding 
his  way  through  the  tall  grass  below  the  hill.  "Oh, 
Hi!"  called  Arthur,  and  Hiram,  shading  his  eyes  from 
the  sinking  sun,  looked  up  where  Arthur  lay  on  the 
ledge.  Everybody  liked  the  cheery  Arthur;  and  Hi 
Fender  climbed  the  hill  with  "Well,  now,  youngster, 
what's  up?" 

"Nothing,  only  Barney  wanted  me  to  ask  you,  when- 
ever I  saw  you,  what  you'd  take  for  that  white  mare 
of  yours.     She  is  yours,  isn't  she?" 

"Well,  yes,  I  allow  she's  mine.  Dad  said  he'd  gin 
her  to  me  on  my  twenty-first  birthda}^,  and  that  was 
April,  the  twenty-one." 

"What'll  you  take  for  her?" 


GREAT  PREPARATIONS  17 

"Don't  want  to  sell.  Besides,  what  d'ye  want  her 
for?" 

"To  go  to  CaHfornia  with." 

"Be  you  fellers  going  to  Californy?" 

"Yes,  if  we  can  get  up  an  outfit." 

Hiram  Fender  looked  languidly  over  the  glowing 
landscape.  He  was  a  "slow-molded  chap,"  Farmer 
Stevens  said;  and  he  never  was  excited.  But  the  sun 
seemed  to  burn  in  his  eyes  as  he  said:  "Will  you  take  a 
fellow  along?" 

"Who?     You?" 

"Sartin,  sartin;  I've  been  a-thinkin'  it  over,  and  I'll 
go  if  you  fellers  go." 

Arthur  jumped  up,  swung  his  ragged  hat  two  or 
three  times,  and  said:  "Good  for  you.  Hi!  and  the  list 
is  made  out  for  four!" 

Hiram  looked  on  him  with  a  mild  query  expressed  on 
his  freckled  face,  and  Arthur  took  out  of  his  pocket 
the  well-worn  list  for  the  outfit  and  read:  "The  fol- 
lowing list  is  calculated  for  four  persons,  making  a  four 
months'  trip  from  the  Mississippi  to  the  gold  diggings.'* 

Hiram  looked  at  it  and  said:  "Five  hundred  and 
twenty-three  dollars!     Phew!" 

Hiram's  father  was  a  thrifty  lUinois  farmer.  The 
neighbors  said  he  was  "forehanded,"  but  he  had 
brought  up  his  boys  to  look  at  least  twice  at  a  dollar 
before  spending  it;  therefore,  when  Hiram  looked  at 


i8  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

the  sum  total  of  the  list,  he  said  "Phew!"  with  an  ex- 
pression of  great  dismay. 

*'But,"  cried  Arthur,  "it  is  for  four  persons,  and  we 
have  figured  it  down  so  that  we  only  want  one  hundred 
and  fifty  dollars.  Can't  you  think  of  some  other  fel- 
low that  would  go?  Then  we  should  have  a  party  of 
four?" 

"I  allow  that  Tom  might  go.  He  wants  to  go  to 
Californy  powerful  bad;  but  I  ain't  right  sure  that 
dad'll  let  him." 

Now,  Tom  was  Hiram's  younger  brother  and  Ar- 
thur's particular  aversion.  So  Arthur  dubiously  said: 
"Wouldn't  Bill  go?" 

"Bill!"  repeated  Hiram,  with  great  disgust.  "Bill 
hasn't  got  spunk  enough  to  go  across  the  Mississippi. 
Why,  he's  that  scared  of  Injuns  that  he  gets  up  in  the 
middle  of  the  night,  dreaming  hke  enough,  and  yelling 
*  Injuns!  Injuns!'  He  was  scart  by  a  squaw  when  he 
was  a  baby,  and  he  goes  on  like  mad  whenever  he  hears 
'em  mentioned." 

Arthur  laughed.     "And  he's  older  than  you.  Hi?" 

"Yes,  Bill's  the  oldest  of  the  family.  But  there's 
little  Tom,  now.  Ain't  he  peart,  though  ?  He  can  yoke 
up  a  pair  of  young  steers,  or  shuck  a  bushel  of  corn 
equal  to  any  grown  man  about  these  parts.  And  he's 
only  fifeeen  come  harvest,  too!  He's  just  afraid  of 
nothing.     He'll  go  fast  enough." 


GREAT  PREPARATIONS  19 

"That  is  if  your  father  will  let  him." 

"Yes,  if  dad'll  let  him.  And  we  can  put  in  my  white 
mare  agin  your  Old  Jim.  But  my  white  mare  will 
kick  your  Old  Jim  all  to  pieces,  I  allow,"  and  Hiram 
grinned  at  what  he  thought  was  the  great  contrast  be- 
tween the  two  horses. 

Arthur  was  very  much  elated  at  the  prospect  of  rein- 
forcements to  the  party,  though  he  could  not  regard 
Tom  Fender  as  a  desirable  recruit.  Tom  was  an  awk- 
ward, loutish  lad,  disposed  to  rough  ways,  and  holding 
very  contemptuous  views  of  the  manners  of  the  Ste- 
vens family,  whom  he  called  "stuck-up  Boston  folks." 
Arthur  had  felt  obhged  to  challenge  Tom  to  open  com- 
bat on  one  occasion,  when  that  young  gentleman, 
secure  behind  Old  Fender's  corn-crib,  bawled  out 
"mackerel-catchers!"  at  Arthur  and  his  brothers  as 
they  were  jogging  along  to  church  one  Sunday  morn- 
ing. The  consequence  was  that  both  boys  wore  black- 
and-blue  eyes  after  that  encounter,  and  suffered  some 
family  discipHne  besides.  They  had  since  been  on  very 
distant  terms  of  acquaintance. 

"I  don't  care.  Hi  Fender  is  a  downright  good  fel- 
low," said  Arthur,  when  Barnard  opened  his  eyes  at  the 
information  that  the  two  Fender  boys  might  be  secured 
for  their  party. 

"Yes,  but  how  about  Tom?" 

Arthur  hesitated.    "Well,  I  want  to  get  off  across  the 


20  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

Plains.  That's  a  fact.  I  think  I  could  get  along  with 
Tom,  if  you  can.  He  is  real  smart  with  cattle  and 
horses,  you  know." 

"Oh,  I  don't  care  for  Tom,"  said  Barnard  disdain- 
fully. "He's  only  a  little  chap,  smaller  than  you,  and 
he  won't  worry  me.  Besides,  his  brother  Hi  is  a  mighty 
good  fellow,  even  if  he  is  rough.  He  is  pretty  close,  I 
know,  but  we  sha'n't  quarrel  about  that.  We've  all 
got  to  be  economical,  if  we  are  to  get  across  to  Cali- 
fornia." 

So  it  was  agreed,  and  when  word  came  up  the  road 
that  Mr.  Fender  had  consented  that  his  boys  should 
go,  there  was  great  excitement  in  the  Stevens  house. 
It  really  seemed  as  if  the  boys  were  going  to  California. 
They  had  insensibly  glided  into  the  whole  arrangement 
without  taking  any  family  vote  on  it.  Neither  father 
nor  mother  had  once  consented  or  refused  that  the 
boys  should  go  with  so  much  of  an  outfit  as  they  might 
pick  up. 

**0h,  father,"  said  Mrs.  Stevens,  "it  is  heart-break- 
ing to  think  of  those  boys  going  off  alone  into  the 
wilderness.  I'm  sure  I  shall  never  see  them  again,  if 
they  go." 

"Well,  mother,  I  should  like  to  keep  them  on  the 
place;  but  they  are  getting  restive,  and  I  don't  much 
blame  them.  They've  got  the  gold  fever  pretty  bad; 
and  if  I  was  as  young  as  they  I  don't  know  but  what  I'd 


GREAT   PREPARATIONS  21 

go  myself.  It's  pretty  hard  pickings  here."  Farmer 
Stevens  had  a  roving  disposition,  which  he  had  not 
quite  outgrown. 

"But,"  remonstrated  the  mother,  "they  haven't 
money  enough  to  give  them  a  good  outfit.  It  would 
be  a  frightful  thing  to  let  those  thoughtless  boys  go 
out  on  the  great  Plains  without  food  and  other  things 
sufficient  to  take  them  through." 

"Now,  mother,  I've  been  thinking  that  we  might  sell 
the  wood  off  the  lower  half  of  the  wood-lot  down  by  the 
marsh.  Page  has  offered  me  one  hundred  dollars  for 
the  cut.  That,  with  what  the  Fenders  put  in  and  what 
we  have  on  the  place,  would  give  the  boys  a  tolerable 
fit-out." 

That  wood-lot  was  the  special  pride  of  the  family. 
"Timber,"  as  every  species  of  tree  was  called  in  those 
parts,  was  scarce.  Wood  was  dear,  and  in  some  sea- 
sons the  prairie  farmers  used  corn  for  fuel,  it  was  so 
much  cheaper  than  wood;  and  it  cost  a  great  deal  to 
get  the  grain  to  market.  It  was  a  great  sacrifice  to 
cut  down  those  maples  and  sell  them  for  fire-wood. 
But  Farmer  Stevens,  poring  over  maps,  estimates  of 
provisions,  and  California  news,  with  his  boys,  had  been 
secretly  fired  with  the  gold  fever.  He  could  not  go; 
but  he  was  willing  to  give  up  the  standing  timber  in 
order  that  Barnard  and  Arthur  should  have  a  good  out- 
fit.    It  cost  him  a  struggle.     But,  old  as  he  was,  he 


22  THE   BOY   EMIGRANTS 

sympathized  with  the  boys  in  their  adventurous  ambi- 
tion. He  was  not  so  sanguine  about  the  gold  in  CaH- 
fornia  holding  out  long.  But  it  was  there  now.  He 
had  seen  and  handled  Josh  Gates's  pile  of  dust;  and 
Solomon  Bookstaver,  who  went  to  the  Columbia  River 
five  years  before,  had  just  come  back  from  California 
and  had  fired  the  entire  population  of  Lee  Centre  with 
his  display  of  golden  nuggets,  or  chispas,  as  Sol  called 
them. 

When  the  father's  determination  to  sell  the  wood  off 
his  wood-lot  was  made  known  the  next  day,  in  family 
council,  Barnard's  face  glowed,  and  Sam  said:  **Well,  I 
swan  to  man!"  Arthur  dashed  out  by  the  back  door, 
turned  five  or  six  "flip-flaps"  to  calm  himself,  came 
back,  and,  putting  his  arm  about  his  father's  neck, 
whispered  in  his  ear:**You  are  the  best  old  father  a 
boy  ever  had!" 

So  it  was  finally  settled  that  the  boys  should  go  to 
CaHfornia,  across  the  Plains,  the  party  consisting  of 
Barnard  and  Arthur  Stevens,  and  Hiram  and  Thomas 
Fender. 

Great  were  the  preparations.  The  provisions  avail- 
able on  the  two  farms  were  laid  under  contribution. 
The  tent,  a  marvel  of  comfort  and  lightness,  was  made 
and  set  up  before  the  house,  to  the  great  curiosity  of 
the  passing  neighbors,  who  stopped  their  teams  and 
asked:  "Gwine  to  Californy?" 


GREAT  PREPARATIONS  23 

In  those  days  groceries  and  clothing  were  cheaper 
than  now,  and,  with  the  cash  which  the  party  had  col- 
lected, they  laid  in  a  very  fair  supply,  and  had  a  little 
money  left  to  use  when  absolutely  necessary  on  the 
journey.  The  young  fellows  hugely  enjoyed  getting 
ready.  The  woolen  shirts  and  jean  overalls,  wide  hats 
and  leather  belts,  which  were  to  be  their  uniform,  were 
put  on  with  solid  satisfaction.  Tom  swaggered  around 
with  a  seven-barreled  Colt's  revolver,  nearly  as  big  as 
himself,  slung  on  his  hip.  Those  dehghtful  days  of 
packing  flew  quickly.  The  wagon  was  crammed  full 
to  the  ash  bows  which  supported  the  canvas  cover.  A 
sheet-iron  camp-stove  was  tied  on  behind.  Water-pail 
and  tar-bucket  dangled  underneath.  Thus  equipped, 
one  fine  May  morning  the  gold-hunters  drove  away. 
Old  Jim  and  White  Jenny  trotted  gayly  down  the 
road,  their  faces  turned  towards  the  West. 

Father  and  mother  stood  at  the  gate.  Hi  Fender 
drove  the  wagon,  the  rest  of  the  party  trudging  along 
by  the  side.  Hubert,  who  had  come  over  from  town 
to  see  the  departure,  with  Sam  and  OHver,  accompa- 
nied the  young  adventurers  to  the  top  of  the  divide, 
where  they  left  them. 

And  so  they  were  off.  Behind  them  was  home.  Be- 
fore them  an  unknown  sea  of  privation,  danger,  want, 
and  adventure.  The  wagon  disappeared  over  the  ridge. 
The  boys  were  gone. 


CHAPTER  III 

CAMPING    OUT 

Iowa  was  not  a  thickly  settled  State  in  those  days, 
and  a  journey  across  it  was  not  so  very  different  from 
the  progress  of  a  caravan  across  the  continent.  But 
there  were  farm-houses  along  the  road  where  the  emi- 
grants could  procure  milk,  fresh  vegetables,  and  bread. 
They  had  little  money,  and  only  bought  such  things 
as  would  help  them  to  economize  their  stock  of  pro- 
visions. By  and  by  they  would  be  out  of  the  reach  of 
all  other  supplies.  Camping  out  was,  at  first,  great 
fun.  Their  tent  was  new,  fresh,  and  clean.  It  was 
big  enough  for  six  people,  and  a  man  could  stand  up- 
right in  the  middle,  where  the  ridge-pole  sustained  the 
roof.  This  roof  was  in  the  shape  of  the  letter  V  turned 
upside  down,  thus:  A.  But  about  two  feet  from  the 
ground  the  canvas  came  straight  down  and  was  fast- 
ened by  wooden  pins  driven  in.  The  main  body  of 
the  tent  was  kept  up  by  ropes,  or  stays,  secured  at  the 
lower  edge  of  the  roof  and  stretched  out  to  large  wooden 
pins  driven  into  the  ground  two  or  three  feet  off. 
Then,  guy  ropes,  extending  from  each  end  of  the  ridge- 

24 


CAMPING  OUT  25 

pole  and  made  fast  to  other  stakes,  kept  the  whole 
concern  steady  when  the  wind  blew.  So  the  house  of 
this  migrating  party  was  dry  and  strong  enough  for 
most  occasions,  and  it  was  easily  packed  in  a  small 
space.  When  the  tent  was  set  up  at  the  end  of  a  day's 
march,  the  two  upright  poles  were  held  up,  with  the 
ridge-pole  laid  on  top  and  secured  at  each  end  by  an 
iron  pin,  which  passed  through  a  hole  at  each  end  of 
the  pole.  Two  boys  held  this  frail  house-frame  to- 
gether while  another  threw  the  canvas  over  it  and 
fastened  it  in  two  or  three  places  to  keep  it  from  tum- 
bling over.  Then  all  hands  stretched  out  the  ropes, 
pinned  the  cloth  at  the  bottom,  and,  in  a  few  minutes, 
the  house  was  ready  for  the  night.  While  travelling, 
the  tent,  with  its  ropes  and  pins,  was  stuffed  into  a 
stout  sack.  The  door  had  no  hinges,  nor  name-plate, 
nor  door-bell;  it  was  a  slit  in  the  canvas  and  was  fast- 
ened with  strings,  instead  of  lock  and  key.  Under 
shelter  of  this  the  emigrants  spread  their  blankets  and 
buffalo-robes,  and  slept  soundly  and  well. 

But  the  cooking  was  a  dreadful  burden.  Barnard 
had  taken  some  lessons  in  bread-making  from  his 
mother  before  starting,  and  he  made  the  first  batch  of 
bread.  No,  it  was  not  exactly  bread,  either.  First 
he  carefully  put  some  flour,  salt,  and  yeast  powder  into 
a  pan  and  mixed  them  thoroughly  with  a  big  spoon, 
the    others    looking    on    with    admiration.      Then    he 


26  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

poured  in  boiling  water  until  he  had  a  thick  paste, 
which  he  mixed  round  and  round  as  before.  It  was 
fearfully  sticky,  but  Barney  bravely  put  his  hands  into 
it  and  attempted  to  mould  the  mass  into  biscuits.  It 
would  not  be  moulded;  such  obstinate  dough  was  never 
before  seen.  When  poor  Barney  tried  to  pick  it  oflP  from 
one  hand  it  would  stick  to  another.  He  rubbed  more 
flour  in  to  make  it  dryer,  and  then  the  lumps  of  dough 
all  wasted  away  into  "chicken  feed,"  as  Hiram  satir- 
ically called  it,  and  there  was  no  consistence  to  it,  and 
when  they  added  water  to  it  the  stuff  became  again 
just  like  glue. 

"You  want  to  pat  the  cakes  round  and  round  in  your 
hands,  so,"  said  Arthur.  "That's  the  way  mother 
does." 

"Pat  'em  yourself,  if  you  know  so  much  about  it," 
said  Barnard  angrily;  and  he  sat  down  in  the  grass, 
and  tried  to  scratch  his  bothered  head  with  his  elbows, 
his  hands  being  helpless  wads  of  dough.  Arthur, 
rolling  up  his  sleeves,  dipped  into  the  pan  and  suc- 
ceeded in  sticking  his  fingers  together  so  fast  that  each 
hand  looked  like  a  very  big  and  very  badly  shaped 
duck's  foot — ^web-fingered,  in  fact. 

"Hang  the  bread!"  he  exclaimed;  and  the  rest  of  the 
family  rolled  over  in  the  grass  roaring  at  the  comical 
figure  he  cut.  He  was  daubed  with  dough  up  to  the 
elbows  and  unable  to  use  his  hands;    a  mosquito  had 


CAMPING  OUT  27 

lighted  on  his  face,  and,  involuntarily  slapping  at  him, 
Arthur  had  left  a  huge  blotch  of  paste  on  his  forehead, 
completely  closing  his  left  eye.  Poor  Arthur  rested 
his  helpless  paws  on  the  edge  of  the  pan  and  said:  "I 
give  it  up." 

"Oh,  dump  her  into  the  baking-pan  and  let  her 
flicker!"  said  Hiram,  as  soon  as  he  could  get  his  breath 
again.  "We  don't  care  for  biscuits;  it's  the  bread  we 
want.     This  is  camping  out,  boys,  you  know." 

So  the  mass  was  tumbled  into  the  baking-pan  and 
put  into  the  oven  of  their  handy  little  sheet-iron  camp- 
stove.  For  a  table  they  had  a  wide, 'short  piece  of 
pine  board,  which,  laid  across  a  couple  of  mining-pans, 
turned  bottom  up,  answered  as  well  as  "real  ma- 
hogany," as  Arthur  said.  On  this  occasion,  however, 
the  tin  plates  and  cups,  the  smoking  coffee-pot,  and 
even  the  fried  meat,  were  on  the  board  long  before 
that  obstinate  bread  showed  signs  of  being  done.  It 
would  not  rise  up  light  "Hke  mother's,"  and  when  a 
straw  was  run  cautiously  into  it  the  inside  seemed  as 
raw  as  ever.  An  hour's  baking  seemed  to  make  no 
impression  on  it,  and  the  boys  finally  supplied  its  place 
with  dry  crackers  and  supped  as  merrily  as  if  they  had 
not  made  their  first  great  failure. 

They  tried  to  throw  away  the  provoking  mess  of 
dough  that  would  not  bake,  but  it  stuck  in  the  pan  as 
obstinately   as   it   had   refused   to   be  cooked.     They 


28  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

scraped  away  at  it  with  all  sorts  of  tools,  but  the  stuff, 
which  now  resembled  a  small  bed  of  mortar,  adhered 
to  the  pan  with  determination. 

"Did  you  grease  that  pan?"  demanded  Arthur. 

"No,"  said  Barney,  with  a  sudden  flush.  "Who  ever 
heard  of  such  a  thing.?" 

There  was  another  shout  of  laughter,  for  everybody 
at  once  recollected  that  the  pan  should  have  had  flour, 
or  some  kind  of  grease,  put  in  it  to  keep  the  dough  from 
sticking.  While  they  laughed,  a  farm-wagon,  in  which 
rode  an  old  man  and  a  young  woman,  came  jogging 
along  the  road  by  which  they  were  camped.  The  girl 
wore  a  faded  red  calico  frock  which  hung  straight  down 
from  her  waist  to  her  bare  brown  feet.  A  huge  ging- 
ham sun-bonnet  with  a  cape  protected  her  head  and 
shoulders. 

Arthur  ran  down  to  the  edge  of  the  road  and  heard 
the  old  man  say:  "Them's  Californy  emigrants."  It 
was  the  first  time  the  boy  had  ever  heard  himself  called 
an  emigrant,  and  he  did  not  like  it.  But  suddenly  re- 
membering that  he  was  one,  he  checked  his  rising  glow 
of  indignation  and  said:  "Say,  miss,  will  you  tell  us 
what's  the  matter  with  this  bread?" 

The  girl  looked  at  her  father,  who  looked  at  the  queer 
group  by  the  tent,  then  at  Arthur's  flushed  and  honest 
face,  and  said:  "Go,  Nance."  So  Nance,  declining 
Arthur's  proffered  hand,  leaped  to  the  ground,  and, 


CAMPING  OUT  29 

wading  through  the  grass,  went  up  and  cast  a  critical 
glance  at  the  objectionable  dough. 

"How  d'ye  make  this  yere?"  she  asked,  pointing 
her  elbow  at  the  bread.  Barnard  described  the  proc- 
ess by  which  he  had  compounded  that  famous  prepara- 
tion of  flour  and  other  things. 

"What  sort  of  water  did  you  put  into  it?"  she  next 
demanded. 

"Why,  good  spring  water,  of  course!"  was  the  reply. 

"Cold  or  hot?" 

"Oh,  boiling  hot,  to  be  sure." 

The  girl  suddenly  clasped  her  hands  to  her  stomach, 
sat  down  in  the  grass  and  doubled  herself  up  like  a 
jackknife.  Then,  sitting  up  again,  she  pushed  back 
her  sun-bonnet,  and,  as  if  addressing  herself  to  the 
camp-stove,  she  said: 

"My  goodness  gracious  me!  if  these  ornery  fellers 
haven't  been  and  gone  and  scalded  their  flour!  Oh, 
my!  Oh,  my!  I'm  just  fit  to  bust!"  And  she  doubled 
herself  up  again. 

"So  we  should  not  have  scalded  the  bread,  Miss 
Sun-bonnet,  should  we?"  asked  Barnard,  who  felt 
ridiculed  and  was  somewhat  nettled. 

The  girl  wiped  her  eyes  on  her  sleeve  and  said: 
"Bread!   it  ain't  bread;   it's  flour  paste." 

Recovering  herself,  Nance  good-naturedly  explained 
that  cold  water  or  milk  should  be  used  in  mixing  the 


30  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

flour;  and,  adding  some  other  general  instructions,  she 
strode  off  through  the  grass  to  the  wagon.  As  she 
cHmbed  up  and  rode  away  the  boys  saw  her  double 
herself  up  once  more,  and  they  thought  she  said: 
** Scalded  his  flour,  the  ornery  critter!" 

Though  this  was  a  severe  lesson  in  housekeeping,  it 
was  not  the  only  one  of  their  mortifying  failures.  Even 
when  they  learned  to  make  bread  with  cold  water,  it 
was  not  until  they  had  spoiled  much  good  flour  that 
they  were  able  to  make  bread  that  was  even  eatable. 
And  it  was  not  in  Iowa  that  they  succeeded  well  enough 
to  satisfy  themselves.  After  they  had  crossed  the  Mis- 
souri, long  after,  and  were  well  out  in  Nebraska,  Ar- 
thur made  the  first  bread  of  which  the  others  proudly 
said  that  it  was  "good  enough  for  anybody." 

Cooking  beans  was  another  perplexity.  They  baked 
them  dry  with  a  piece  of  pork,  and  when  they  were 
"done,"  they  rolled  out  of  the  baking  kettle  like  gravel 
stones,  harder  than  when  they  went  into  it.  Then, 
when  they  discovered  that  the  beans  should  have  been 
soaked  and  boiled,  or  parboiled,  before  baking,  they 
took  two  quarts  and  soaked  and  boiled  them.  The 
beans  swelled  and  swelled  until  the  big  camp  kettle 
overflowed.  They  were  put  into  other  dishes,  but 
would  not  stop  swelling,  and  before  those  beans  were 
ready  to  bake  every  dish  in  camp  was  full  and  over- 
flowing.    A  satirical  wood-chopper,  loafing  up  to  their 


"BREAD!      IT  AIN'T   BREAD;     IT'S   FLOUR    PASTE 


CAMPING  OUT  31 

camp  in  the  midst  of  the  crisis,  inquisitively  asked: 
"Be  you  fellows  peddlin'  beans  across  to  Californy?" 

But,  notwithstanding  all  these  drawbacks,  the  boys 
began  to  enjoy  themselves  very  much.  Some  days  it 
was  very  hot  and  tedious  tramping  along  in  the  dusty 
road,  especially  when  they  reflected  that  they  were  so 
far  from  the  end  of  their  journey.  Even  though  days 
of  travel  were  behind  them,  before  them  the  road 
stretched  out  for  more  than  a  thousand  miles.  They 
seemed  to  have  been  on  the  journey  a  good  while,  but 
they  knew  that  months  must  pass  before  they  could 
reach  the  end  of  it.  "This  is  awful  slow  work,"  Bar- 
ney would  say  when  they  reckoned  up  the  day's  prog- 
ress.' "Only  twenty-one  miles  to-day,  and  a  couple 
of  thousand,  more  or  less,  to  get  over." 

Hiram,  however,  a  patient  and  plodding  fellow,  "al- 
lowed" that  it  took  so  many  steps  less  for  next  day's 
journey,  because  those  of  to-day  had  been  taken,  one 
by  one.  And  Arthur  used  to  look  back  at  their  camp- 
ing-place when  they  had  moved  on  for  an  hour  or  so, 
and  blithely  say;  "Now  I  am  two  miles  nearer  Cali- 
fornia than  I  was  this  morning." 

"Two  miles  ain't  much,  especially  when  a  chap  has 
got  the  dishes  to  wash  at  the  end  of  every  twenty 
miles,"  says  Tom,  surlily.  Washing  dishes  was  a  very 
disagreeable  part  of  camp  duty.  It  was  a  continual 
subject  of  contention.     Nobody  wanted  to  wash  dishes. 


32  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

To  be  sure,  the  whole  camp  equipage  did  not  amount 
to  more  than  four  or  five  tin  plates  and  as  many  cups 
and  knives  and  forks.  An  active  kitchen-maid  would 
have  disposed  of  the  whole  lot  in  a  few  minutes.  But 
the  boys  were  not  kitchen-maids,  and,  what  was  more, 
they  would  not  appear  as  though  they  were.  Hiram 
thought  that  as  long  as  he  was  responsible  for  fire-wood 
and  water,  dish-washing  should  not  be  included  in  his 
duties.  Barnard  usually  drove  the  team,  and  had  gen- 
eral charge  of  that  important  branch  of  the  service. 
Tom  and  Arthur  attended  to  pitching  the  tent  at  night, 
unloading  the  wagon  of  things  needed  during  camping 
time,  and  taking  down  the  tent,  packing  up,  and  col- 
lecting camp  furniture  in  the  morning  preparatory  to 
a  start.  All  hands,  with  equal  unsuccess,  tried  the 
cooking;  and  all  hands,  though  ready  to  find  fault  with 
each  other's  cooking,  declared  that  they  would  do  any- 
thing but  cook — unless  it  was  to  wash  dishes. 

"Perhaps  you  had  better  hire  a  girl  to  go  along  and 
wash  dishes,  Arty,"  said  Barnard  reproachfully. 

"I  don't  care,  Barney;  I  didn't  ship  to  wash  dishes, 
and  I  won't;  so  there,"  was  Arthur's  invariable  reply, 
which  Barnard  as  invariably  met  with  "Who  did.?" 

Obviously  nobody  did.  So  the  dishes  went  un- 
washed, sometimes  for  days  together.  One  morning, 
Hiram,  taking  up  his  plate,  said:  "I  wonder  what  was 
in  this  yere  plate  last?     There's  bacon  fat  and  corn- 


CAMPING  OUT  33 

dodger  crumbs,  boiled  rice,  molasses  and  I  allow  that 
there  gray  streak  in  that  nor'-nor'-west  corner  is  chicken. 
Tell  yer  what,  boys,  I  don't  allow  that  I'm  agoin'  to 
drive  horses,  chop  wood,  or  lug  water  for  fellers  that 
won't  wash  dishes  for  decency's  sake.  I'm  willin'  to 
do  my  share  of  the  cookin',  turn  and  turn  about.  You 
two  boys  ought  to  wash  the  dishes  regular.  I'm  the 
oldest  feller  in  this  yere  camp,  and  if  you,  Tom  and 
Arthur,  don't  find  some  way  of  doin'  up  those  yere 
dishes  between  ye,  before  we  git  to  the  Bluffs,  ye  may 
as  well  make  up  yer  minds  to  go  back  from  there." 

This  was  a  long  speech  from  Hiram,  who  always 
meant  what  he  said.  Barnard  supported  him  in  this 
decision;  and  the  younger  boys,  though  feeling  very 
much  **put  upon,"  agreed  to  take  turns  at  playing 
house-maid. 

The  first  experiment  was  attended  by  a  serious  dis- 
aster. They  drew  lots  for  the  first  week's  duty,  and 
Arthur  was  "stuck,"  as  he  expressed  it,  for  the  service. 
Sitting  somewhat  morosely  on  the  ground,  one  evening, 
at  work  on  this  unwelcome  job  of  dish-washing,  he 
turned  the  only  crockery  plate  of  the  establishment 
about  in  his  hands,  wiping  it  and  scolding  to  himself. 
Tom,  who  was  not  a  little  elated  that  he  was  exempt 
from  this  service,  at  least  for  one  week,  stood  by, 
and,  aggravatingly  pointing  with  his  foot  at  the  plate, 
said: 


34  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"Be  careful  of  that  yere  crockery,  Arty,  it's  Hi's 
favorite  dish.     He'll  dress  ye  down  if  ye  smash  it." 

Arthur,  with  a  gust  of  rage,  cracked  Tom  over  his 
toe  with  the  plate,  breaking  it  into  pieces. 

"There,  now!     I " 

But  before  Tom  could  say  any  further,  Hiram,  who 
had  watched  the  whole  proceeding,  seized  both  boys 
by  the  collar  and  hustled  them  toward  a  creek  which 
flowed  near  camp. 

"Where  are  you  going  with  those  boys?"  shouted 
Barnard,  amazed  and  laughing  as  he  saw  stout  Hiram 
wrestling  with  the  two  squirming  boys. 

"I'm  going  to  drown  'em,  like  I  would  a  pair  of  quar- 
relsome cats,"  said  Hiram,  manfully  struggling  with 
the  youngsters. 

"No  you  don't,  though,"  said  Tom,  dexterously 
twisting  one  of  his  legs  in  between  Hiram's  feet.  The 
young  man  staggered  a  little,  and,  in  his  effort  to  save 
himself  from  falling  into  the  creek,  let  both  boys  go 
loose.  They  stood  a  little  way  off,  looking  defiantly 
at  each  other  and  at  Hiram. 

"Your  family  government  does  not  seem  to  work 
well,"  said  Barnard.  "I  guess  we'll  have  to  send  the 
boys  back  from  Council  Bluffs.  They  never'll  go 
through  this  way." 

Arthur,  who  still  held  in  his  hand  a  bit  of  the  plate 
that  had  been  the  innocent  cause  of  this  outburst,  said: 


CAMPING  OUT  35 

"Well,  Tom  pestered  me;  but  I'm  willing  to  try  it 
again.     Give  us  a  fair  trial,  Barney." 

Tom  was  sulky,  but  admitted  that  he  should  not 
have  provoked  Arthur. 

"Tom,  I'll  tell  ye  what  I'll  do  with  yow,"  said  Hiram. 
"If  ye  don't  behave  yerself,  I'll  take  away  yer  revolver 
and  put  you  on  the  first  boat  bound  down,  after  we  get 
to  the  BlufFs." 

"That  will  be  binding  him  over  to  keep  the  peace,'* 
said  Barnard. 

"No,"  added  Arthur,  opening  his  hand  and  showing, 
with  a  blush,  the  fragment  of  Hiram's  pet  plate,  "I'm 
going  to  keep  the  piece." 

And  he  did. 


CHAPTER  IV 
"the  jumping-off  place" 

A  CITY  of  tents  covered  the  flat  banks  of  the  Mis- 
souri, below  Council  Bluffs,  when  our  party  reached  the 
river.  In  those  days  Council  Bluffs  was  a  scattered 
and  rough  looking  town,  about  four  miles  from  the 
Missouri  River;  and,  where  its  edges  were  frayed  out 
toward  the  south,  was  a  long,  level  strip  of  land,  ex- 
tending to  the  broad  sweep  of  the  stream.  Westward, 
this  plain  was  dotted  with  thousands  of  cattle,  belong- 
ing to  emigrants;  and  in  that  part  of  the  plain  nearest 
the  town  were  the  carts  and  wagons  of  those  whose 
faces  were  now  turned  toward  California.  It  was  a 
novel  sight.  Here  were  men  mending  wagons,  cooking 
in  the  open  air,  repairing  their  tents  or  clothes,  trading 
off  some  part  of  their  outfit,  or  otherwise  making  ready 
for  the  final  start  across  the  Plains. 

Looking  across  the  flat  bottom  land,  Arthur  could 
barely  catch  a  glimpse  of  the  Big  Muddy,  as  the  peo- 
ple called  the  Missouri  River.  A  fringe  of  low  trees 
showed  where  the  stream  flowed  by;  and  occasionally 
a  huge  three-story  steamboat  went  gliding  down  in 
the   distance,    looking   exactly    as    if  it   were    moving 

36 


"THE  JUMPING-OFF  PLACE"  37 

through  the  meadows.  Beyond,  the  western  side  of 
the  river  was  somewhat  bluffy  and  broken.  A  few 
wooden  shanties  were  grouped  about  the  ferry  land- 
ing, a  huge  scow  being  the  means  of  transit.  The 
ferry  was  a  primitive  affair,  guided  by  a  rope  stretched 
across  the  stream.  On  one  eminence  stood  a  weather- 
beaten  structure,  partially  boarded  over.  This  was  de- 
signed to  be  the  capitol  when  the  country  should  be 
erected  into  the  Territory  of  Nebraska.  The  groups  of 
shanties  scattered  about  over  the  hills  had  no  name. 
Omaha  has  since  arisen  on  that  site.  Then,  however, 
the  whole  country  was  one  of  great  expectations. 

With  eyes  wide  open,  scanning  the  curious  sights  on 
every  side,  the  boys  drove  their  team  down  the  river 
road,  in  search  of  a  good  camping-place.  Their  ex- 
perience in  traveling  through  Iowa  had  taught  them 
that  they  must  find  a  dry,  smooth  spot  for  their  tent, 
water  for  the  camp,  and  grass  for  the  horses.  On  the 
edge  of  this  strange  city  of  tents  they  found  all  of 
these,  and  there  they  encamped. 

But  they  were  not  allowed  to  do  this  unnoticed. 
Although  people  were  continually  going  and  coming, 
there  were  enough  idle  fellows  to  watch  the  new- 
comers and  make  remarks  upon  them.  "Here's  more 
candidates  for  California  fortunes."  "Going  to  the 
Pacific  with  that  raw-boned  boss?"  "Oh,  get  out  of 
that  wagon  and  walk  to  the  diggins."     "What  are  you 


38  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

going  to  do  with  that  gold-pan?"  "Say,  sonny,  does 
yer  mammy  know  you're  out?"  These  were  some  of 
the  rude  salutations  which  greeted  the  party  as  they 
drove  sturdily  down  through  the  city  of  tents. 

Arthur's  eyes  snapped  a  little,  and  his  cheeks  burned; 
but  Hiram,  perched  in  the  wagon,  flung  back  the  rude 
observations  with  cheerful  readiness.  One  kindly- 
faced  man,  who  walked  along  beside  the  boys,  said: 

"You  mustn't  mind  these  chaps;  they're  rough,  but 
good-natured;  and  if  you  should  happen  to  get  into 
difficulty,  they  would  help  you  readily  enough." 

Their  new  acquaintance  showed  them  where  parties 
from  various  parts  of  the  Western  States  were  en- 
camped; and  they  pitched  their  tent  near  that  of  some 
men  from  Hancock  County,  Illinois,  and  soon  made 
themselves  at  home. 

They  felt  that  they  had  reached  "the  jumping-off 
place."  Beyond,  across  the  river,  was  nothing  but 
that  vast  unbroken  stretch  of  country  which  used  to 
be  laid  down  in  the  school  maps  as  "Unexplored 
Regions."  Even  now  it  was  unexplored  except  by  a 
few  people  who  had  gone  over  to  Oregon,  Utah,  or 
California.  Contradictory  reports  about  the  value  of 
the  gold  diggings  were  coming  into  this  canvas  city  of 
emigrants.  The  very  day  that  they  arrived  there  ran 
a  rumor  through  the  camp  that  two  men  had  just  come 
in  from  California  with  very  discouraging  news.     It 


"THE  JUMPING-OFF   PLACE"  39 

was  said  that  they  had  come  through  in  twenty-eight 
days,  running  their  mules  all  the  way;  had  had  narrow 
escapes  from  Indians,  and  had  got  so  far  back  on  their 
way  to  "the  States,"  as  everybody  called  the  country 
east  of  the  Missouri. 

After  the  boys  had  settled  their  camp  for  the  night, 
they  went  out  and  hunted  up  these  bearers  of  ill  tidings. 
Pressing  into  a  little  knot  of  men  near  the  camp  of 
some  New  Englanders,  who  had  fitted  out  at  Council 
Bluffs,  they  saw  a  rough,  bearded,  ragged,  and  seedy- 
looking  man,  sitting  on  a  wagon-tongue.  He  was 
smoking  a  short  pipe  with  great  enjoyment,  and  oc- 
casionally he  dropped  a  word  by  way  of  answer  to  the 
questions  that  were  showered  upon  him. 

"Gold!  no!"  he  replied,  with  great  scorn,  "that's 
no  gold  in  the  hull  country.  How  do  I  know?  Why, 
I  war  thar  a  week;   that's  how  I  know." 

"Where  were  you?"  asked  one  of  the  bystanders. 

"I  was  on  the  Yuba,  jest  what  it  jines  into  the  Amer- 
ican.    That's  what  I  war." 

"But  I  didn't  know  the  Yuba  emptied  into  the  Amer- 
ican; the  Yuba  is  further  north,"  said  Barnard  im- 
pulsively and  before  he  thought. 

"Been  thar?"  growled  the  returned  Californian. 

"No,"  said  Barnard,  with  a  blush. 

"Wal,  I  have,  you  bet  yer,"  rejoined  the  other. 
"And  it's  no  use  o'  yer  talkin',  men;   I  have  mined  it 


40  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

more  nor  a  week  in  them  diggins;  never  got  so  much 
as  a  color." 

"Did  you  hear  of  anybody  who  did  find  gold?" 
somebody  asked. 

"Here  and  thar  war  a  man  who  said  as  how  he  had 
seed  some  other  feller  as  had  seed  another  who  had 
heerd  tell  on  some  other  chap  as  had  found  somethin' 
that  looked  like  gold.  I  don't  put  no  trust  into  any 
on   em. 

"You  look  as  if  you'd  had  a  hard  time,"  said  a  sym- 
pathizing visitor. 

"Misery  in  my  bones,  wust  way;  I  ain't  been  so 
powerful  bad  in  my  life  afore.  Fever  'n  ager  wuss 
than  in  Arkansaw.     You  bet  yer." 

"Why  didn't  you  keep  on  down  the  Yuba,  prospect- 
ing?" 

"Keep  on?"  replied  the  veteran,  with  infinite  scorn. 
"We  war  nigh  out  of  grub.  No  gold  in  sight.  We'd 
rastled  with  our  luck  long  enough,  me  and  my  pard. 
So  we  jist  lit  out'n  that  'tween  two  days.  Powerful 
glad  we  are  to  be  yar,  too,  you  bet  yer." 

"You  look  it,"  said  one  of  the  emigrants,  who  seemed 
to  regard  this  dampening  report  as  a  sort  of  personal 
injury. 

Younkins,  for  this  was  the  name  of  the  returned  pros- 
pector, told  the  same  story  all  through  the  camps.  No 
gold  in  California,  but  much  sickness;  cholera,  fever 


"THE  JUMPING-OFF  PLACE"  41 

and  ague,  and  a  plenty  of  men  glad  to  get  away,  if  they 
could  only  find  the  means  to  travel  with.  Some  of  the 
emigrants  did  not  believe  these  reports.  Some  said: 
"Oh,  these  chaps  are  discouraging  emigration  to  the 
diggins.  They  want  it  all  themselves.  They  can't 
fool  us  that  way."  But  others  were  downright  dis- 
couraged. 

A  day  or  two  after,  four  men  crossed  the  river  from 
the  Nebraska  side,  driving  an  ox-team  with  a  shabby 
wagon.  They  had  gone  as  far  west  as  Fort  Laramie, 
where  they  heard  bad  news  and  had  turned  back.  The 
boys  sought  out  this  party,  and  heard  their  story.  They 
had  lost  a  comrade,  who  had  died  on  the  way  to  Lar- 
amie. They  were  gloomy,  disheartened,  and  out  of 
spirits.  They  overtook  people  coming  back.  Some 
had  been  through  to  California;  or  they  said  they  had. 
Others  had  turned  their  faces  homeward  after  hearing 
the  reports  of  others. 

This  bad  news  had  its  effect  in  the  camps.  "The 
mines  have  given  out,"  was  the  cry  around  many  of  the 
camp-fires;  and  not  a  few  wagons  were  packed  up,  or 
sold  out  at  auction,  and  the  disheartened  owners  re- 
turned to  "the  States,"  out  of  pocket  as  well  as  out 
of  spirits.  In  a  few  days  outfits  were  to  be  had  for 
low  prices.  The  weekly  newspaper  at  Council  Bluffs 
vainly  tried  to  keep  up  the  excitement.  Reports  from 
California  were  discouraging.     If  there  ever  had  been 


42  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

any  gold  there,  it  was  exhausted.  It  was  useless  to 
say  that  there  never  was  any  of  the  precious  stuff  found 
in  the  mines.  Many  of  the  emigrants  had  seen  some 
that  had  been  brought  to  their  own  homes.  Arthur 
and  Barney  had  touched  and  handled  Gates'  golden 
ore.  But  the  mines  had  given  out,  and  that  was  the 
end  of  the  matter. 

"I  don't  believe  any  such  yarn,"  said  Barnard, 
stoutly.  "I  don't  want  to  influence  the  rest  of  you 
boys;  but  I'm  going  through.  For  one,  I  shall  not 
turn  back." 

"Nor  I!"  said  Arthur,  with  a  burst  of  enthusiasm. 

"Nor  I,"  added  Tom. 

"It's  Californy  or  bust,  with  me,"  said  Hiram,  sen- 
tentiously. 

So  they  were  agreed. 

But  things  looked  rather  blue  at  times;  and  when 
those  who  had  turned  back  drove  slowly  up  the  road 
and  disappeared  among  the  bluffs,  Arthur  looked  after 
them  with  some  misgivings,  and  with  a  touch  of  home- 
sickness in  his  heart.  Then  he  turned  his  eyes  west- 
ward where  the  sun  dipped  below  the  western  hills. 
As,  at  one  glance,  he  saw  the  long  trail  stretching  over 
the  unknown  land,  it  was  a  mysterious  and  untried 
way.  The  boy  hesitated  only  for  a  moment,  and 
stretching  out  his  arms  toward  the  setting  sun,  said 
to  himself,  "I'm  bound  to  go  through!" 


,  "THE  JUMPING-OFF  PLACE"  43 

After  all,  however,  there  were  very  few  who  turned 
back,  compared  with  the  number  remaining  at  the 
Bluffs.  And  every  steamboat  that  came  up  the  river 
brought  fresh  recruits  from  the  towns  and  cities  below. 
These  had  only  part  of  their  outfit  with  them;  some  of 
them  at  once  bought  out  the  entire  equipment  of  those 
who  were  returning,  and  so  stepped  into  possession  of 
all  that  was  needed  to  take  them  through.  In  a  few 
days  the  city  of  tents  grew  a  great  deal;  and,  on  the 
western  side  of  the  Missouri,  where  the  bottom  land 
spread  out,  as  on  the  Iowa  side,  there  was  a  consider- 
able encampment.  These,  like  the  camps  across  the 
river,  were  changing  all  the  while.  Every  day  a  train  of 
wagons  would  roll  out  over  the  hills,  bound  for  Califor- 
nia at  last;  and  new  additions  were  immediately  made. 
This  was  the  place  where  emigrants  to  California  found 
what  was  yet  to  be  added  to  their  equipment.  Sup- 
plies were  plenty,  and  sold  at  reasonable  prices.  Peo- 
ple who,  like  our  boys,  had  traveled  across  the  country 
by  team  had  used  some  of  their  provisions  before  reach- 
ing the  Bluffs;  and  their  brief  experience  in  camping 
out  and  traveling  showed  them  where  their  equipments 
were  imperfect.  Council  Bluffs  was  a  busy  place; 
everybody  had  something  to  sell;  and  the  citizens  of 
that  thriving  town  strolled  among  the  canvas  tents  of 
the  emigrants  with  calm  satisfaction. 

There  was  much  hunting  to  and  fro  for  people  who 


44  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

had  come  across  the  country  by  their  comrades  who 
had  followed  after  by  the  speedier  transit  of  railroad 
and  steamboat.  Some  of  these  parties  were  never 
made  up  again.  It  often  happened  that  those  who 
arrived  first  grew  tired  of  waiting  for  those  who  were 
to  come  after.  Although  there  was  much  delay  at  the 
Bluffs,  everybody  was  feverish  and  excited.  If  they 
were  going  on  to  the  land  of  gold,  they  were  in  a  hurry 
to  start.  If  they  had  decided  to  return,  they  had  no 
time  to  waste  at  the  river.  So  little  companies  broke 
up,  some  going  on  and  some  turning  back.  Friends, 
neighbors  and  families  were  thus  dispersed,  never  to 
meet  again.  And,  wandering  around  from  camp  to 
camp,  were  those  who  expected  to  find  their  comrades, 
but  who,  too  often,  found  that  they  had  gone  on  be- 
fore. Some  of  these  belated  ones  were  disheartened, 
and  went  no  farther;  but  most  of  them  joined  them- 
selves to  other  parties  and  so  pushed  on  to  Cali- 
fornia. 

Our  boys  began  to  think  that  their  two-horse  team 
was  hardly  heavy  enough  to  draw  their  wagon  across 
the  continent.  They  saw  that  most  people  had  at 
least  two  spare  horses;  and  many  more  oxen  than 
horses  were  used  by  the  emigrants. 

"Oxen  is  the  things,  I  allow,  after  all,  boys,"  said 
Hiram,  who  had  studied  the  subject  carefully  while 
coming  through   Iowa.     "Just   suppose  one  of  these 


"THE  JUMPING-OFF   PLACE"  45 

bosses  should  up  and  die;   where'd  ye  be  tben?     We'd 
bave  to  baul  through  with  one  boss." 

"But  suppose  we  were  chased  by  Indians,"  remon- 
strated Arthur.  "We  couldn't  get  away  with  oxen, 
could  we?" 

"Indians!  pshaw!"  said  Hiram,  "there  ain't  no  In- 
dians, so  far  as  heerd  from.  And  if  there  were,  bosses 
won't  save  us,  you  may  bet  on  that." 

"We  might  trade  off  our  horses  for  oxen,"  said 
Barnard,  "but  we  couldn't  expect  to  get  two  yoke  of 
oxen  for  a  pair  of  horses;  and  unless  we  had  two  yoke 
we  should  be  no  better  off  than  we  are  now." 
,  "Cattle  are  cheap,"  explained  Hiram.  "We  can  buy 
a  yoke  for  fifty  or  sixty  dollars.  Old  Jim  is  worth  that 
much  money,  and  my  Jenny  could  sell  for  more  than 
the  cost  of  another  yoke.  The  farmers  around  here 
are  bringing  in  their  cattle." 

"Golly!  how  it  rains,"  broke  in  Tom,  who  had  been 
trying  to  keep  the  beating  current  out  of  the  tent.  The 
water  flowed  in  under  the  edge  of  the  canvas  from  the 
sloping  ground  in  the  rear.  Arthur  jumped  up  in  con- 
sternation. He  had  been  sitting  in  a  little  pool  of 
water. 

"All  hands  out  to  dig  trenches,"  shouted  Barnard. 
The  night  was  pitch  dark,  and  the  boys  seized  their 
lantern,  shovels  and  ax  and  sallied  out  to  dig  a  nar- 
row ditch  about  the  tent.     The  water  poured  into  this. 


46  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

and  so  was  carried  ofF  on  each  side,  and  their  canvas- 
house  stood  on  a  Httle  island  of  its  own.  But  the  rain 
fell  in  torrents,  and  the  tent  flapped  wildly  in  the  wind. 

"Tell  you  what,  fellers,"  said  Hiram,  shaking  the 
water  from  him,  as  they  crouched  inside  again,  "this 
ain't  what  it's  cracked  up  to  be.  Camping  in  a  rain- 
storm ain't  great  fun;   hey,  Arty?" 

Arthur  was  just  going  to  say  that  they  might  be 
worse  off  before  they  got  across  the  Plains,  when  a  pair 
of  very  thin  hands  were  thrust  in  at  the  opening  of 
the  tent,  now  tied  together  for  the  night,  and  a  thin 
voice  said:  "Please  may  I  come  in?" 

"Sartin,  sartin,"  said  Hiram,  heartily.  "Walk  in 
and  make  yourself  to  hum,  whosumever  you  be." 

Arthur  unfastened  the  tent  curtain,  and  a  boyish 
figure,  slender  and  woe-begone,  struggled  into  the 
group. 

The  stranger  might  have  been  about  thirteen  years 
old.  He  looked  as  if  he  had  lived  about  forty  years. 
He  wore  a  pair  of  trousers  made  of  striped  jean,  re- 
sembling bed-ticking;  and  his  jacket  of  Hnsey-woolsey 
homespun,  and  dyed  with  butternut  juice,  was  much  too 
short  at  the  wrists.  His  face  was  pale,  but  sweet  and 
pleasant,  and  he  had  mild  blue  eyes.  Under  his  arm 
he  carried  a  large  bundle,  and  on  his  head  he  wore  a 
very  seedy  coon-skin  cap,  wet  and  dripping  with  the 
rain.     He  put  his  bundle  carefully  on  the  ground,  and 


"THE  JUMPING-OFF   PLACE"  47 

tied  the  tent  together  again;  then,  turning  about,  he 
surveyed  the  little  party  in  the  tent  with  mild  inquiry, 
but  without  a  word. 

"What  mought  yer  name  be?"  asked  Hiram,  when 
nobody  else  had  broken  silence. 

"Johnny." 

Hiram  paused.  He  felt  that  the  boy's  name  was  not, 
after  all,  of  much  consequence  to  anybody;  but  to  ask 
for  it  was  one  way  to  begin  a  conversation.  And  he 
had  not  got  far.     "Johnny"  was  rather  vague. 

"Johnny  what?"  spoke  up  Tom. 

"That's  all.     Only  just  Johnny,"  was  the  reply. 

"Oh,  don't  bother  the  boy  about  his  name,"  broke 
in  Barnard.  "Where  are  your  folks?  Are  you  going 
to  California?" 

"Yes,  I'm  going  to  Californy;  and  I  don't  know 
where  my  folks  are.  Perhaps  you've  seen  'em,  sir. 
There's  a  tall  one  with  red  hair,  and  a  short  one  with 
harelip,  and  another  one  with  a  game  leg.  Oh,  sir, 
haven't  you  seen  'em  nowhere?"  and  the  poor  boy's 
eyes  filled  with  tears  as  he  spoke. 

"A  game  leg?"  repeated  Hiram.  "Boys,  don't  you 
remember  that  thar  mean  skunk  as  stole  Josh  Davis's 
ox-chain  over  on  the  west  side?  He  mought  have  been 
the  chap.  Did  he  wear  a  red  shirt,  with  a  blue  hand- 
kercher  around  his  neck?"  he  asked  of  Johnny. 

"Yes,"  said  the  boy;  "and  his  name  was  Bunce — 


48  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

Bill  Bunce — and  we  are  from  Vermillion  County,  II- 
mois. 

"I  allow  he  and  his  pardners  have  gone  on  ahead," 
said  Hiram. 

"I  was  over  on  the  Omaha  side  when  they  drove 
out,"  added  Tom,  and  they  had  a  big  yaller  dog  named 
Pete  with  them.  Golly!  but  that  dog  was  a  master- 
hand  to  hunt  chipmunks!     How  he  would " 

"Oh,  you  talk  too  much  with  your  mouth,"  inter- 
rupted Hiram,  impatiently.  Johnny  showed  signs  of 
breaking  into  tears.  He  sat  down  and  told  his  story. 
He  had  lived  in  VermiUion  County  with  a  man  who 
was  called  a  doctor,  he  said.  Evidently  he  had  been 
hardly  used,  and  had  never  known  father  or  mother. 
A  drudge  in  a  country  doctor's  house,  he  had  been  kept 
in  ignorance  of  the  world  outside,  of  his  own  friends, 
and  of  his  father  and  mother.  He  had  never  even  been 
told  his  own  name.  How  did  he  get  here?  That  was 
simple  enough.  Three  or  four  of  the  doctor's  neighbors 
were  going  to  California.  They  offered  to  take  the 
boy  along.  He  was  too  glad  to  get  away  from  the 
brutal  and  quick-tempered  doctor,  to  wait  for  a  second 
hint.  They  had  journeyed  on  together  to  Quincy,  on 
the  Mississippi,  where  the  men  left  Johnny  to  follow 
them  by  steamer,  while  they  went  "another  way,"  as 
they  said.  They  promised  to  write  to  him  when  to 
start  for  Council  Bluffs.     He  waited  several  weeks  at 


"THE  JUMPING-OFF  PLACE"  49 

the  miserable  little  boarding-house  where  they  had 
lodged  him.  Alarmed  at  the  long  delay,  he  had  started 
off  by  himself,  and  here  he  was. 

"  Probably  their  letters  miscarried,"  said  Arthur,  with 
pity  in  his  eyes. 

"More  likely  they  never  wrote,"  added  his  wiser 
brother. 

The  youngster  looked  distressed,  but  spoke  up  cheer- 
fully: "Perhaps  they  haven't  gone.  They  said  they 
would  wait  here  for  me." 

But  Hiram  was  sure  about  "the  man  with  the  game 
leg";  he  was  not  positive  as  to  the  others.  Both  Ar- 
thur and  Tom  remembered  the  lame  man  with  the  big 
yellow  dog,  especially  the  dog;  and  nobody  was  sure 
whether  the  tall  man  with  him  had  red  hair. 

"Well,  you  can  bunk  down  with  us  to-night,"  said 
Hiram,  "and  in  the  morning  we'll  take  a  hunt  through 
the  camps,  and  if  your  fellows  haven't  lighted  out,  we'll 
find  'em." 

The  next  morning  broke  fair  and  bright.  The  rain 
had  ceased  in  the  night  and  great  drops  were  shining 
on  the  grass  and  on  the  bushes  that  bordered  the  plain. 
With  a  bound  of  exhilaration,  Arthur  sprang  out  of  his 
damp  blankets  and  began  to  make  ready  for  breakfast. 
Johnny  crept  out  into  the  sunshine,  and,  having  fol- 
lowed Arthur's  example  by  taking  a  wash  from  the 
tin  wash-hand  basin  that  was  produced  from  the  wagon. 


50  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

he  sat  watching  the  preparations  about  the  camp- 
stove. 

"May  I  stay  to  breakfast  with  you?"  he  asked. 
"I've  got  money  enough  to  pay  for  it." 

"I  don't  know,"  said  Arthur,  doubtfully.  "You  will 
have  to  ask  Barney.  Well,  yes,  you  shall  stop  too,"  he 
added,  as  he  saw  the  boy's  face  fall.  You  shall  have 
my  breakfast  anyhow." 

"But  I  can  pay  for  it.  I've  got  some  money  sewed 
into  my  jacket." 

"How  much.f"'  demanded  Tom,  who  was  splitting  up 
a  fence-rail  for  fire-wood. 

"Eighty  dollars,"  said  Johnny,  simply. 

"Jerusalem  crickets!"  exclaimed  Tom.  "Where  did 
you  get  so  much.^" 

"Dr.  Jenness  gave  it  to  me  before  I  left.  He  said  it 
was  mine,  and  that  he  had  been  keeping  it  for  me." 

Before  any  more  talk  could  be  made,  a  bright-faced, 
handsome  young  fellow,  with  a  citified  and  jaunty  air, 
walked  up  to  the  group  and  asked:  "Can  you  tell  me 
where  I  can  find  the  Lee  County  boys,  as  they  call 
them?" 

"That's  us,"  said  Tom,  with  a  good-natured  grin. 

"Well,  I'm  in  luck;    and  where's  the  captain?" 

Barnard,  who  was  coming  out  of  the  tent  with  an 
armful  of  bedding,  said:  "We  have  no  captain.  What's 
your  will?" 


"THE  JUMPING-OFF  PLACE"  51 

"I  hear  you  want  a  yoke  of  cattle.  I  have  a  yoke 
which  I  should  like  to  turn  in  as  part  of  my  outfit,  if 
you  will  take  another  partner.     I'm  going  through.'* 

Barnard  eyed  him  suspiciously,  and  said:  "Where 
from?" 

"Well,  I'm  from  Boston  last;  born  in  Vermont, 
though;  have  been  in  the  dry-goods  trade;  got  tired  of 
selHng  goods  over  the  counter.    I'm  going  through." 

The  boys  looked  curiously  at  the  Boston  dry-goods 
salesman,  who  had  come  all  the  way  to  Council  Bluffs 
to  find  a  chance  to  go  to  California.  He  said  his  party 
had  broken  up  and  gone  back. 

"We'll  think  it  over,"  said  Barnard. 

"All  right,"  said  the  Boston  man.  /'My  name  is 
Montague  Morse." 


CHAPTER  V 

NEW   PARTNERS 

The  boys  were  a  little  shy  of  Mr.  Montague  Morse. 

He  had  the  appearance  of  "a  city  chap,"  Hiram  Fender 

said.     He  wore  a  plaid  velvet  vest,  a  black  frock-coat 

(somewhat  seedy,  to  be  sure),  and  his  trousers,  though 

tucked  into  the  tops  of  his  calfskin  boots,  were  more 

suitable  for  Boston  streets  than  for  the  great  plains. 

Then  he  was  very  precise  in  his  language,  and  had  a 

way  of  saying  "good  morning,"  instead  of  "mornin' 

to  yer,"  which  quite  discomfited  Hiram  and  Tom.    The 

latter  took   the   earliest   opportunity   to   declare   that 

"that  Boston  feller  was  cranky."    It  seemed  very  odd, 

too,  that  he  should  be  knocking  about  there  on  the 

frontier,  alone,  and  seeking  a  chance  to  get  in  with  some 

party  bound  across  the  continent.     To  be  sure,  he  said 

that  his  party  had  broken  up  and  had  left  a  yoke  of 

cattle  on  his  hands;    but  how  did  they  know  that  he 

had  not  stolen  these  oxen?     Arthur  fairly  shuddered 

when  this   dark  suspicion   crossed   his   mind;   and   he 

looked  involuntarily  to  see  if  their  new  acquaintance 

did  not  have  the  "game  leg"  by  which  Johnny  had  de- 

52 


NEW  PARTNERS  53 

scribed  a  missing  adventurer.  Morse,  however,  told  a 
very  straightforward  story,  and  his  manner  was  so 
frank  and  open  that  one  of  the  party,  at  least,  regarded 
him  with  favor.  Barnard  said,  after  much  deUberation : 
"That  fellow  is  clear  grit." 

One  afternoon  the  boys,  leaving  Tom  at  home  "to 
keep  house,"  crossed  the  river  and  hunted  up  Morse, 
who  was  temporarily  quartered  at  the  camp  of  some 
Illinois  men.  They  saw  his  oxen  grazing  in  the  meadow 
hard  by,  and  soon  satisfied  themselves  that  he  had 
honestly  come  into  possession  of  them.  The  people  at 
the  Illinois  camp  knew  all  the  circumstances  of  the 
breaking  up  of  the  Boston  man's  party,  and  they  in- 
cidentally told  the  story  over  again  while  gossiping 
about  the  intended  trade  with  our  boys. 

"But  if  we  take  your  cattle  in  with  our  team  we 
shall  have  to  trade  off  our  horses,  and  get  a  yoke  of 
oxen  for  ourselves,"  interposed  Barnard. 

"Hosses?  have  you  got  a  boss  for  sale?"  asked  one 
of  the  Illinois  party. 

"We  have  a  pair,"  replied  Barnard,  "which  we  shall 
not  want  if  we  go  on  with  cattle.  What  do  you  think 
are  best  for  the  plains — cattle  or  horses.?" 

"Well,  some  allow  that  bosses  is  best,  because  they're 
the  fastest;  then,  agin,  there's  them  that  allows  that 
cattle's  best,  because  they  hold  out  better  in  the  long 
run.     Then,  agin,  cattle  can  feed  where  bosses  would 


54  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

e'enamost  starve  to  death.  Hosses  is  delicate  critters, 
powerful  delicate.  How  much  do  you  allow  you'll  get 
for  yer  hoss?" 

Hiram  broke  in  with  the  information  that  they  had 
not  made  up  their  minds  to  sell.  They  were  only  con- 
sidering the  matter.  At  this,  a  silent  man,  who  had 
been  mending  his  trousers  in  a  corner  of  the  tent, 
spoke  up: 

"I  know  four  chaps  camped  down  by  the  creek. 
They've  got  a  cheap  yoke  of  cattle — a  young  cow  and  a 
smart  little  steer:  just  the  thing  for  a  leadin'  yoke." 

Arthur  laughed  outright  at  the  idea  of  driving  a  cow 
in  an  ox-team. 

"Well,  you  may  laugh,  young  feller,"  said  the  man, 
as  he  shut  up  one  eye  and  tried  to  thread  his  needle; 
"but  let  me  tell  ye  that  cows  is  cows  in  Californy — 
one  hundred  and  sixty  or  seventy  dollars  a  head,  I've 
heerd  tell;  and  a  good  drivin'  cow  will  pull  like  all  pos- 
sessed, if  she's  rightly  yoked.  Then  there's  yer  milk  all 
through,  ye  see,  fur  nothin',  so  to  speak."  And  he 
resumed  his  mending. 

"It  wouldn't  do  any  harm  to  go  and  see  that  team 
of  mixed  critters,"  suggested  Hiram. 

So  the  boys  started  up,  and,  getting  directions  from 
the  party  in  the  tent,  went  off  to  find  the  camp  by  the 
creek.  As  they  were  moving  away,  the  spokesman  of 
the  IlUnois  men  called  after  them: 


NEW  PARTNERS    •  55 

"I'll  trade  with  ye  for  that  white  hoss  of  your'n.  I 
seen  him  when  we  war  comin'  through  loway.  Say 
sixty-five  dollars?" 

"He's  worth  seventy-five,"  called  back  Hiram,  and 
the  boys  went  on  together,  the  Boston  man  leading  off 
at  a  great  pace.  They  searched  around  a  long  time 
before  they  found  the  camp  of  the  men  who  had  a  yoke 
of  cattle  to  sell.  At  most  of  the  camps  where  they  in- 
quired things  seemed  gloomy.  The  latest  news  from 
California  was  unfavorable.  Many  were  talking  about 
turning  back,  but  many  others  were  doggedly  complet- 
ing their  preparations  for  the  final  start.  One  man, 
standing  on  the  wheel  of  his  wagon,  with  a  marking- 
brush  and  pot  of  paint,  was  printing  on  its  canvas  cover 
the  words  "California  or  bust."  This  was  a  sort  of 
defiant  declaration  that  many  men  thought  it  necessary 
to  make,  considering  how  many  people  were  endeavor- 
ing to  discourage  others.  The  sign  was  common  on 
the  tents  and  wagon-covers  of  the  emigrants.  Others 
had  such  inscriptions  as  "We  are  bound  to  go  through," 
or  "Bound  for  the  Sacramento,"  and  one  party  had 
painted  on  their  wagon-cover  "Root,  hog,  or  die." 

It  was  a  picturesque  sight  this  city  of  emigrants. 
More  people  were  here  than  on  the  east  side  of  the  river. 
Most  of  them  had  completed  their  outfit  at  Council 
Bluffs,  and  were  fixing  up  the  few  odds  and  ends  that 
were  needed  before  the  final  start.     Already  they  af- 


56  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

fected  the  rude  ways  and  manners  of  the  plains.  For 
the  most  part,  the  men  wore  slouched  hats,  and  red  or 
blue  flannel  shirts;  they  discarded  coats  and  vests, 
and  wore  belts  at  the  waist.  The  weather  was  mild, 
for  it  was  now  early  May,  and  groups  of  emigrants 
were  cooking  in  the  open  air,  and  carrying  on  a  sort  of 
outdoor  house-keeping,  of  which  their  wagons  were  the 
foundation.  Here  and  there  was  a  family  of  father, 
mother,  and  children.  One  wagon  the  boys  saw  had 
"No  more  Missoury  for  us"  painted  on  its  dingy  red 
cover  in  black  letters;  and  a  flock  of  white-haired 
children — Arthur  said  there  were  sixteen — climbed 
out  and  in,  staring  open-eyed  at  the  strangers.  This 
populous  group  had  no  tent;  they  lived  wholly  in  the 
wagon,  an  enormous  aff"air  with  a  tall  top,  high  at  each 
end  and  lower  in  the  middle.  The  father  of  the  family, 
a  yellow-faced,  discouraged-looking  man,  wearing  mud- 
colored  clothes  of  home-spun,  "allowed"  that  he  was 
from  "Arkinsaw,"  and  was  not  quite  sure  whether  he 
should  go  to  California  or  Oregon.  He  should  go  by 
the  North  Platte  route,  and  turn  off"  to  the  north  by 
the  Fort  Hall  road,  if  the  gold  news  should  "peter  out" 
by  the  time  he  reached  that  point. 

"Gosh!  how  that  Boston  fellow  do  walk,"  sighed 
Hiram,  who  found  it  difficult  to  keep  up  with  their  new 
comrade.  Morse  strode  on  ahead,  talking  eagerly  over 
his  shoulder;    and  the  hard  buds  of  the  "rosinweed" 


NEW  PARTNERS  57 

plants  that  covered  the  meadow  rattled  against  his 
boot  legs  as  he  measured  off  the  ground.  Arthur 
trotted  along  somewhat  laboriously,  and  wondered  if 
all  Boston  people  walked  like  Mr.  Montague  Morse. 

They  found  the  men  who  had  the  ox  and  cow  for 
sale — four  great  hulking  fellows  who  had  four  yoke  of 
cattle  among  them.  They  had  two  wagons,  one  of 
which  they  had  exchanged  for  provisions  and  cash  in 
the  town  of  Council  Bluffs,  and  the  other  they  retained. 
They  would  sell  the  ox  and  cow  together  for  sixty-five 
dollars.  The  cow  was  "skittish  and  a  little  wild-like," 
but  a  good  milker  and  was  first-rate  in  the  yoke.  The 
steer — well,  there  he  was,  a  small  black  fellow,  with 
one  horn  crumpled  down  in  the  oddest  sort  of  way. 

"Strong  as  a  steam-ingine,"  explained  the  owner. 
"Strong  as  a  steam-ingine  and  tame  as  a  kitten.  And, 
stranger,  he's  just  the  knowingest  critter  you  ever  see. 
'Pears  like  he  was  human,  sometimes — hey,  Tige!" 
and  the  man  affectionately  patted  the  Httle  black  steer 
on  his  nose. 

"Is  this  all  you've  got  to  sell?"  asked  Hiram,  rather 
discontentedly. 

"Well,  the  fact  is,  stranger,"  replied  the  man,  "we 
don't  really  want  to  sell.  'Pon  my  word,  we  don't. 
But  we've  no  need  fur  all  these  cattle,  and  we  do  need 
the  money.  I  just  hate  like  poison  to  part  with  Old 
Tige.     (His  name's  Tiger,  you  see,  and  we  call  him 


58  THE  BOY   EMIGRANTS 

Tige  for  short.)  But  we've  got  three  other  yoke  and 
a  light  load;  and  we  allow  to  go  through  right  peart, 
without  no  trouble." 

The  boys  walked  around  the  cattle  two  or  three 
times  more,  their  owner  treating  them  to  a  long  string 
of  praises  of  his  odd  yoke,  as  he  sat  on  the  wagon- 
tongue  and  talked  fast. 

''Come  now,  say  sixty  dollars  and  it's  a  trade.  1 
want  the  money  powerful  bad,"  he  concluded. 

Arthur  pulled  Hiram's  sleeve  and  said: 

"Take  him.  Hi;  take  him.  I  like  that  little  black 
steer. 

Hiram  spoke  up:  "Give  us  the  refusal  of  this  yer 
yoke  of  cattle  until  to-morrow?" 

"We  have  not  yet  concluded  whether  we  shall  buy 
any  cattle  here,  or  go  on  with  our  horses,"  explained 
Bernard.  Morse  looked  a  little  disappointed,  but  said 
nothing. 

It  was  agreed  that  the  boys  should  have  until  next 
day  to  make  up  their  minds  about  buying  the  cattle  at 
sixty  dollars  for  the  yoke.  As  they  walked  back, 
Morse,  thoughtfully  whipping  off*  the  weed-tops  with 
his  ox-goad,  said: 

"You  fellows  take  account  of  stock — ^wagon,  outfit, 
provisions,  and  team.  I'll  put  in  my  yoke  of  cattle 
and  my  share  of  provisions  and  outfit,  or  money  to  buy 
them,  and  will  pay  you  my  proportion  of  the  cost  of 


NEW  PARTNERS  59 

the  wagon.  Partnership  limited;  the  concern  to  be 
sold  out  when  we  get  through;  share  and  share  alike. 
How's  that?" 

"That's  fair,"  said  Barnard.  But  Hiram  nudged 
him,  and  then  he  added:  "We'll  talk  it  over.  You 
come  across  and  see  us  the  first  thing  to-morrow  morn- 
ing." 

It  was  agreed,  and  the  boys  went  back  to  their  camp 
to  discuss  the  proposition.  Barnard  and  Hiram  were 
really  the  final  authorities  in  the  matter;  but  Arthur 
and  Tom  exercised  the  younger  brother's  privilege  of 
saying  what  they  thought  about  it.  Arthur  thought 
the  Boston  man  must  be  a  good  fellow.  He  was  bright 
and  smart;  and  Arthur  had  noticed  that  he  spoke 
cheerily  to  the  white-headed  children  in  the  Arkansas 
wagon.  Besides,  he  was  always  pleasant  and  full  of 
jokes,  added  the  boy  with  a  feeling  that  that  was  not 
conclusive,  though  he  had  formed  his  opinions  partly 
by  it. 

"I  suppose  we  have  really  made  up  our  minds  to  go 
with  oxen.  I  like  that  Boston  chap.  We  can't  get  an- 
other yoke  of  cattle — if  we  sell  your  horse  and  buy  the 
ox-and-cow  yoke — any  better  than  by  taking  this  man 
into  camp  with  us,"  argued  Barnard. 

"But  them  store  clothes!"  said  Hiram,  with  some 
disgust. 

"Why,  he  can't  help  it  if  he  has  to  wear  out  his  old 


6o  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

city  clothes,"  said  Arthur,  eagerly.  "He  is  not  foolish 
enough  to  throw  them  away.  So  he  wears  'em  out  for 
common  ones.     Don't  you  see?" 

"And  he's  a  powerful  walker,"  added  Hiram  with  an 
expression  of  admiration  on  his  freckled  face.  "Golly! 
how  that  chap  kin  walk,  though!" 

And  this  turned  the  scale.  The  Boston  man  was 
solemnly  voted  into  the  partnership. 

Tom  once  more  objected  that  Morse  was  "stuck  up," 
and  he  was  once  more  suppressed  by  his  brother,  who 
reminded  him  that  he  talked  too  much  with  his  mouth. 
This  frequent  rebuke  having  silenced  Tom,  Hiram 
added: 

"A  feller  that  knows  as  much  about  cattle  as  he  does, 
and  kin  walk  like  he  does,  isn't  stuck  up.  Besides,  he'll 
put  in  just  about  eighty  dollars  inter  the  company's 
mess." 

At  this,  little  Johnny,  who  still  clung  to  the  boys, 
started  up:  "Eighty  dollars!  Oh,  I've  got  eighty 
dollars.     Won't  you  take  me  through  for  that?" 

Hiram  looked  with  some  disdain  on  the  little  fellow, 
who  was  trembling  with  excitement,  and  said:  "You 
got  eighty  dollars  my  little  kid!      Where?" 

Johnny  hastily  stripped  off  his  striped  trousers,  and, 
turning  out  the  lining  of  the  waistband,  showed  four 
flat,  round  disks  of  something  hard,  carefully  sewed  in. 

"Them's  it!  them's  it!     Four  on  'em;  four  twenty- 


NEW  PARTNERS  6i 

dollar  gold  pieces,  all  sewed  in."  And,  slitting  little 
holes  in  the  cloth,  he  showed  the  coins,  sure  enough, 
each  sewed  in  separately  from  the  other. 

"Poor  little  chap!  We  don't  want  to  take  your 
money,"  said  Barnard. 

"No,"  added  Hiram.  "Besides,  you  hain't  got  no 
clothes  wuth  speaking  about.  You  can't  go  across  the 
plains  in  them  clothes." 

"They're  not  'store  clothes,'  though,  Hiram,"  added 
Arthur  with  a  laugh.  But  Arthur's  heart  had  gone  out 
to  the  poor  little  waif,  and  he  reminded  his  comrades 
that  part  of  his  money  might  be  used  for  an  outfit,  and 
it  would  be  only  fair  to  take  part  as  his  share  of  the 
cost  of  the  trip. 

"Besides,  I've  got  clothes,"  said  the  waif;  and,  un- 
rolling his  bundle,  he  showed  some  coarse  woolen  shirts, 
a  pair  of  cowhide  shoes,  overalls,  and  a  few  small  ar- 
ticles of  wearing  apparel. 

Barnard  inspected  these  critically,  and  said:  "No 
woman  folks  put  these  up;  but  they'll  do  better  than 
nothing." 

Arthur  felt  a  touch  of  homesickness  at  this  remark, 
and  his  thoughts  flew  back  to  his  mother  as  he  glanced 
over  his  own  tidy  suit,  the  work  of  his  mother's  hands. 
He  saw  her  again  at  the  garden-gate,  as  he  had  seen 
her  many  a  time  while  camping  out  in  the  lovely  Iowa 
prairies;    and,  with  a  soft  voice,  he  said; 


62  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"Let's  take  Johnny  along,  boys.  He  shall  have  half 
of  my  blankets." 

"What  do  you  say,  Barney?"  asked  Hiram,  with  a 
little  glow  in  his  honest  heart,  though  he  looked  at  the 
waif  with  an  air  of  severe  scrutiny. 

"I'm  agreed,  if  you  are,"  repHed  Barnard.  "But  I 
tell  you  what  it  is,  Arty — our  tent  is  full,  and  we  can't 
have  any  more  passengers  or  lodgers.  The  partnership 
is  complete  this  time." 

At  this  Johnny,  who  had  ripped  out  the  four  gold 
coins  from  his  waistband,  put  them  into  Hiram's  hand, 
and  said: 

"Am  I  going  through  with  you.?" 

"Well,  I  allow  you  shall  go  through  with  us,  young- 
ster. It's  share  and  share  alike,  you  know;  and  you 
are  to  do  your  part  of  the  work.  That's  all.  There's 
nothin'  comin*  to  ye  when  we  get  through.  Understand 
that?"  And  a  hard  look  flitted  across  the  young  man's 
face  as  he  jingled  the  gold  in  his  palm. 

Johnny  protested  that  he  understood  the  bargain 
perfectly.  He  was  to  have  such  clothes  as  they  thought 
necessary.  The  rest  of  his  cash  was  to  pay  for  his 
share  of  the  provisions  needed  for  the  trip. 

Next  day  Morse  came  over  early,  with  the  informa- 
tion that  the  Illinois  men  would  give  seventy  dollars 
for  Hiram's  white  horse.  Morse  was  informed  of  the 
conclusion  of  the  partnership  discussion.     The  terms 


NEW   PARTNERS  63 

were  once  more  gone  over  and  fairly  understood  on 
both  sides,  and  the  bargain  was  ratified.  **Now,  then," 
said  Barnard,  "this  is  Mister  Hiram  Fender,  late  of 
Lee  County,  Illinois,  known  as  Hi  Fender  for  short. 
This  is  Thomas  Fender,  brother  of  the  same,  and  *a 
right  peart  boy,'  as  he  says;  otherwise  Tom.  And  this 
infant  is  my  brother,  Arthur  Adams  Stevens,  probably 
the  best  boy  that  ever  lived — except  myself — and  is 
known  in  this  camp  as  Arty.  As  for  myself,  I  am  Arty's 
brother,  which  is  glory  enough  for  me,  and  my  name  is 
Barker  Barnard  Stevens;  otherwise  Barnard,  usually 
called  Barney  for  short,  and  sometimes  dubbed  Barney 
Crogan,  by  my  small  and  impertinent  brother." 

The  boys  laughed  heartily  at  this  long  speech;  Morse, 
not  to  be  outdone  in  advancing  into  intimate  acquain- 
tance, said: 

''Permit  me,  gentlemen,  to  introduce  myself — Mon- 
tague Perkins  Morse,  late  of  Hovey  &  Co.'s,  Boston; 
now  bound  for  CaHfornia,  or  bust;  and  generally  known 
as  Mont  Morse,  or,  if  you  prefer,  Mont — and  very 
much  at  your  service." 

With  a  great  deal  of  enthusiasm,  the  boys  celebrated 
this  happy  conclusion  of  affairs  by  going  over  the  river 
and  closing  the  two  bargains.  The  white  horse  was 
sold  to  the  Illinois  men  for  seventy  dollars;  and  they 
took  Tige  and  Molly,  for  these  were  the  names  of  the 
ox  and  cow,  at  the  sum  agreed  upon  the  day  before.    , 


64  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"We  will  move  over  here  to-morrow,"  said  Hiram, 
"and  we  will  take  the  cattle  off  your  hands  then," 

"But  to-morrow  is  Sunday,"  said  Mont.  "We  are 
not  going  to  travel  Sundays,  are  we?" 

Hiram  looked  a  little  troubled  for  a  moment.  Then 
Barney  cheerily  said: 

"Oh,  no;  we  are  not  going  to  travel  Sundays,  ex- 
cept in  cases  of  great  emergency.     Are  we,  Hi?" 

"Certainly  not,"  answered  Hiram,  briskly.  "Never 
allow  to  travel  on  Sundays,  not  if  we  can  help  it." 

"Then  you'll  keep  the  cattle  until  Monday,  won't 
you?"  asked  Barnard. 

"Well,  if  you  fellers  are  too  pious  to  come  over  on 
Sunday,  you  may  take  'em  away  now,"  said  the  man, 
gruffly. 

"All  right,"  replied  Hiram.  "We'll  take  them  now, 
and  be  beholden  to  nobody  for  nothin'." 

So  the  cattle  were  taken  across  the  ferry,  and  the 
boys  had  milk  with  their  corn-meal  mush  that  night. 

"A  mean  old  hunks,"  growled  Hiram.  "Wanted  us 
to  smash  Sunday  all  to  pieces,  did  he?  Well,  I  allow  we 
made  just  two  milkings  out  of  him." 

Sunday  here  was  not  like  the  Sabbath  at  home. 
Labor  was  generally  suspended  throughout  the  camps, 
however,  except  where  some  impatient  party  stole  out 
with  their  teams,  driving  along  with  a  half-subdued 
air,  as  if  afraid  "to  smash  Sunday  all  to  pieces."    Here 


NEW  PARTNERS  65 

and  there,  emigrants,  looking  neat  but  uneasy  in  their 
particularly  clean  clothes,  lounged  about  the  wagons 
and  "traded"  in  undertones,  or  discussed  the  latest 
news  from  California,  by  way  of  the  States. 

The  bright  May  sun  shone  down  upon  a  motley  mass 
of  people  scattered  among  tents  or  grouped  around 
wagons.  About  noon,  the  blowing  of  a  horn  announced 
that  a  religious  service,  of  which  notice  had  been 
previously  circulated,  would  begin.  There  was  a  gen- 
eral sauntering  in  the  direction  of  a  cluster  of  wagons 
near  which  a  preacher,  standing  on  a  feed-box,  called 
the  people  about  him. 

Five  or  six  women,  wives  of  emigrants,  aided  by 
twice  as  many  men,  formed  a  choir,  and  their  voices 
rose  sweetly  on  the  air  with  the  familiar  hymns  of 
Christian  service.  Then  the  minister,  after  devotional 
exercises,  preached  a  Httle  sermon  from  the  text  in 
Romans  viii.,  17.  He  talked  about  heirs  and  heirship; 
he  dwelt  on  the  fact  that  they  were  all  seeking  an  in- 
heritance, and  while  he  inculcated  wisdom  and  pru- 
dence in  this  search,  admonishing  the  people  about  him 
to  seek  the  true  riches,  he  reminded  them  that  they 
were  joint  heirs;  that  their  inheritance  was  mutual. 
He  taught  them  to  bear  with  one  another;  to  be  pa- 
tient, loving,  and  to  go  on  in  their  journey  of  life,  as 
across  the  continent,  with  unselfishness,  bearing  each 
other's  burden. 


66  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"That's  a  right  smart  chance  of  a  sermon,"  said 
Hiram  as  they  moved  away  after  the  last  hymn  had  been 
sung  and  the  attentive  crowd  had  dispersed.  "A  good 
sermon;  and  just  you  remember  what  the  parson  said 
about  toting  one  another's  burdens,  you  Tom,  will  ye?" 

Tom  received  this  lesson  with  some  show  of  indigna- 
tion, and  said: 

**0  yes,  you're  the  man  that  hears  sermons  for  some 
other  feller,  you  are." 

But  Arthur  added  in  the  interest  of  peace: 

"Tige  can't  carry  the  yoke  alone.  Molly  must  bear 
up  her  end.  So  if  you  and  I  don't  wash  the  dishes  and 
get  supper,  Hi  and  Barnard  can't  drive  the  wagon  and 
get  wood  and  water." 

"Good  for  you,  Arty,"  said  Hiram,  heartily.  "And 
even  little  Johnny  here  is  goin'  to  pitch  in  and  do  his 
share.  I  know  he  is,  for  I  seen  him  choppin'  wood  this 
mornin'  like  sixty." 

Johnny  colored  with  pleasure  at  this  rude  praise,  and 
Arty  declared  that  Johnny  was  one  of  the  joint  heirs 
whom  the  preacher  had  talked  about. 

The  debate  about  the  sermon  and  their  future  united 
interests  was  a  pleasant  end  to  a  pleasant  day.  Mont 
had  taken  up  his  abode  with  the  party.  The  tent  was 
full,  and  the  six  young  fellows  were  paired  off  among 
the  quilts  and  blankets  that  covered  their  floor  of 
grassy  earth. 


NEW   PARTNERS  67 

That  night  Arthur  felt  Johnny  stirring  under  the 
blankets  by  his  side. 

"What  is  the  matter,  Johnny?"  he  asked. 

The  boy  put  his  thin  hand  on  his  companion's  shoul- 
der and  whispered  in  his  ear:  "I  love  you." 

Arty  kissed  the  little  waif  and  said:  "It's  a  bargain." 
Then  they  slept  again. 


CHAPTER  VI 

ADRIFT 

"Well,  now,  Johnny,  you  do  look  right  peart." 
This  was  Hiram's  opinion  of  the  little  lad  when  he 
had  been  equipped  with  his  new  suit  of  clothes.  He 
brought  enough  apparel  with  him  for  common  wear; 
but  he  needed  a  serviceable  suit  for  a  change.  This, 
with  the  necessary  boots  and  shoes,  a  warm  jacket  for 
cold  weather,  and  some  additional  supplies  which  his 
enlistment  in  the  company  required  to  be  bought, 
made  quite  a  hole  in  the  eighty  dollars  which  he  had 
put  into  the  common  fund. 

** Never  mind,  youngster,"  said  the  good-natured  Hi. 
*'I  allow  we'll  have  enough  for  all  hands  to  get  through 
on;  so  as  you  pitch  in  and  do  your  share  of  work,  we 
sha'n't  find  no  fault." 

Johnny  declared  his  willingness  to  do  all  he  could 
for  the  benefit  of  the  company,  whether  it  was  picking 
up  fuel,  washing  dishes,  or  driving  the  team.  He  was 
quite  a  man  now,  he  thought,  though  only  a  little  fel- 
low.    For  wasn't  he  bound  for  Cahfornia  to  make  his 

fortune?      And  he  was  going  with  his  own  resources, 

GS 


ADRIFT  69 

too,  and  could  earn  his  way.  This  thought  made  the 
boy  cheerful  and  happy;  the  color  came  again  into  his 
cheeks;  he  grew  merry  and  frolicsome;  and,  before  the 
last  days  of  preparation  were  over,  the  poor  outcast 
was,  as  Hi  said,  "right  peart." 

They  had  delayed  at  the  river  a  long  time.  There 
were  many  things  to  be  disposed  of,  and  their  places  to 
be  supplied  with  articles  which  were  more  needed. 
There  were  preventives  against  scurvy  to  be  bought, 
for  they  had  heard  that  some  emigrants  ahead  of  them 
had  suffered  from  that  dreadful  disease,  just  as  sailors 
do  on  the  ocean  when  their  vegetables  and  fresh  pro- 
visions give  out.  So  the  boys  laid  in  a  supply  of  dried 
apples  and  vinegar,  and  traded  away  some  of  the  stuff 
which  they  had  in  excess.  Then  parts  of  the  wagon 
had  to  be  changed  to  suit  the  oxen,  as  they  were  now  to 
make  the  voyage  across  the  plains  with  cattle  instead 
of  horses. 

One  bright  May  morning  they  took  down  their  tent, 
packed  their  bedding,  loaded  the  wagon,  yoked  up  the 
cattle,  and  began  their  long,  long  tramp  across  the 
continent.  Numerous  other  emigrant  trains  were 
stretching  their  way  over  the  rolling  prairies  to  the 
westward,  and  the  undulating  road  was  dotted  with 
the  white-covered  wagons  of  their  old  neighbors  of  the 
canvas  settlements  by  the  Missouri  River.  Looking 
behind,  they  saw,  with  a  little  pang  of  regret,  the  well- 


70  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

beaten  spot  where  they  had  made  their  home  so  long. 
Around  that  place  still  lingered  a  few  emigrants,  who 
waved  their  hats  to  them  by  way  of  cheer,  as  the  long 
procession  of  adventurers  wound  its  way  over  the 
ridges.  Beyond  and  behind  was  the  flowing  river;  the 
bluffs  which  give  their  name  to  the  town  bounded 
the  horizon,  and  beyond  these  was  the  past  life  of  these 
young  fellows,  with  all  its  struggles;  there  was  home. 

Before  them  lay  the  heart  of  the  continent  with  its 
mysteries,  difficulties,  and  dangers.  They  tramped  on 
right  bravely,  for  beneath  the  blue  horizon  that  lured 
them  forward  were  wealth,  fame,  adventure,  and — 
what  these  bright  young  spirits  most  longed  for — op- 
portunities for  making  their  own  way  in  the  world. 
At  any  rate,  they  had  turned  their  backs  on  civiliza- 
tion and  home. 

Their  patience  was  tested  somewhat  severely  during 
their  very  first  week  on  the  track  across  the  continent. 
They  expected  disagreeable  things,  and  they  found 
them.  They  had  been  travelling  through  a  rolling 
country,  destitute  of  timber  and  dotted  with  only  a 
few  bunches  of  brushwood  by  the  creeks.  Barney, 
Arthur,  and  Tom  took  turns  at  driving  the  team. 
Mont  strode  on  ahead.  Hi  and  Johnny  "changed  off" 
with  riding  Old  Jim,  for  whose  back  a  saddle  had 
been  "traded"  for  at  the  Bluffs,  The  young  emigrants 
were  in  first-rate  spirits,  and  when  a  light  rain  came  up 


ADRIFT  71 

at  night,  they  laughed  bhthely  over  the  prospect  of 
soon  getting  used  to  the  "hardships"  of  which  they 
had  been  so  often  warned.  It  was  discouraging  work, 
however,  cooking  supper;  for,  by  the  time  they  had 
camped,  the  rain  fell  in  torrents.  They  got  their  camp- 
stove  into  the  tent,  and,  by  running  out  its  one  joint  of 
pipe  through  the  open  entrance,  they  managed  to  start 
a  fire.  More  smoke  went  into  the  tent  than  out  of  it, 
for  the  wind  had  veered  about  and  blew  directly  into 
it.  Then  they  decided  to  strike  the  tent  and  change 
it  around  so  as  to  face  to  the  leeward.  This  was  a 
difficult  job  to  do  while  the  rain  fell  and  wind  blew. 
But  the  boys  packed  their  camp  stuff  together  as  well 
as  they  could,  and  took  down  the  tent. 

"Hold  on  tight,  boys!"  shouted  Barnard,  cheerily,  for 
the  canvas  was  flapping  noisily  in  the  wind,  and  threat- 
tened  to  fly  away  before  it  could  be  secured.  Arty  held 
up  one  pole  and  Barnard  the  other,  while  Mont,  Hi, 
and  Tom  ran  around  to  pin  the  canvas  to  the  earth, 
Johnny  following  with  the  bag  of  tent-pins.  Just 
then  a  tremendous  gust  came,  and  away  flew  the  tent 
Hke  a  huge  balloon,  jerking  Tom  head  over  heels  as 
it  went.  Poor  little  Johnny  clung  to  it  desperately, 
having  caught  hold  of  one  of  the  ropes  as  it  went  whirl- 
ing over  his  head.  He  was  dragged  a  short  distance 
and  gave  it  up,  his  hands  being  cut  and  torn  by  the 
line. 


72  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"Stop  her!  stop  her!"  yelled  Hi,  and  away  they  all 
ran  after  the  flying  canvas.  The  cattle  were  cowering 
under  the  lee  of  a  few  bushes  across  the  road,  and  the 
apparition  of  the  collapsed  tent  coming  over  their  heads 
startled  them  so  that  they  ran  wildly  in  all  directions. 
The  cow  was  caught  by  the  horns,  a  fold  of  the  tent- 
cloth  having  been  entangled  on  them,  and  she  set  off, 
frantically  bellowing,  across  the  prairie.  The  canvas 
by  this  time  was  so  wet  and  heavy  that  it  could  not 
be  dragged  far,  and,  when  the  boys  came  up,  poor 
Molly  was  a  prisoner.  They  rescued  their  fugitive 
house,  and,  in  a  sorry  plight,  took  it  back  to  where 
their  camp  was  now  exposed  to  a  pelting  rain. 

** Ain't  this  fun,  Arty?"  said  Hi,  grimly,  when  they 
were  once  more  under  cover. 

"Fun  alive!"  replied  Arty.  "And  so  long  as  we  have 
a  roof  over  us  for  the  night,  we  are  in  great  luck.  But 
how  we  are  ever  to  get  supper  is  more  than  1  know." 

"Supper?"  retorted  Barnard.  "I'd  like  to  know 
where  we  are  going  to  sleep  to-night.  Every  inch  of 
ground  is  sopping  wet,  and  no  fire  that  we  can  build 
will  dry  it." 

"We  can  get  a  good  fire  in  the  stove,"  said  Mont, 
sagaciously,  "and  keep  moving  it  about  until  we  dry  the 
worst  of  it;  and,  when  it  stops  raining,  it  will  drain 
off  a  great  deal.  But  it  does  not  look  much  like  hold- 
ing up,"  he  added,  as  he  looked  out  at  the  sheets  of 


ADRIFT  73 

rain.  "And  if  it  don't  hold  up,  we  may  as  well  not  go 
to  bed  at  all." 

Indeed,  the  prospect  was  rather  gloomy,  and  the 
young  emigrants  began  to  think  themselves  early  in- 
troduced to  the  disagreeable  part  of  their  trip.  They 
managed  to  keep  up  a  roaring  fire  in  their  camp-stove, 
however,  and  the  air  in  the  tent  was  dry  and  warm. 
They  made  tea  and  fried  their  meat,  and  with  dry 
crackers  secured  a  tolerable  meal.  By  midnight  the 
rain  abated  and  ceased  flowing  under  the  canvas. 
They  then  lay  down  on  the  damp  blankets,  and  slept 
as  best  they  might.  Toward  morning  Arty  awoke, 
and,  hearing  the  rain  on  the  canvas  roof,  reached  out 
his  hand  and  found  the  ground  near  by  covered  with 
water.  Water  was  everjrwhere  around  him.  He  lay 
in  a  puddle  which  had  accumulated  under  him.  At 
first  he  thought  he  would  turn  over  and  find  a  dry  spot. 
But  he  immediately  discovered  that  that  would  not  be 
a  good  plan.  He  had  warmed  the  water  next  him  with 
the  natural  heat  of  his  body.  To  turn  over  was  to 
find  a  colder  place.  So  he  kept  still  and  slept  again  as 
soundly  as  if  he  were  not  in  a  small  pond  of  water. 

They  were  wakened  after  sunrise  by  the  sound  of 
wagons  driving  by.  Jumping  up  from  their  damp  beds, 
the  young  emigrants  found  themselves  somewhat  be- 
draggled and  unkempt.  But  the  rain  had  ceased,  the 
sun  was  shining  brightly,  and  what  discomfort  can  long 


74  THE   BOY   EMIGRANTS 

withstand  the  influence  of  a  fair  day,  sunshine,  and  a 
warm  wind  ? 

The  cattle,  fastened  up  the  night  before  to  the 
wagon-wheels,  were  lowing  for  freedom;  and  the  boys 
were  at  once  ready  to  begin  preparations  for  another 
day's  journey.  They  spread  their  bedding  and  spare 
clothing  in  the  sunshine,  brought  out  their  camp-stove, 
built  a  fire,  and  had  a  jolly  breakfast  with  hot  biscuits 
and  some  of  the  little  luxuries  of  camp  fare. 

All  that  day  the  boys  travelled  with  their  blankets 
spread  over  the  wagon-top,  in  order  to  dry  them  in  the 
hot  sun;  but  not  one  of  the  party  complained  of  the 
discomforts  of  the  previous  night,  nor  showed  any  sign 
of  being  any  worse  for  sleeping  in  the  rain. 

"It  gets  me,  Mont,"  said  Hi  Fender,  "that  a  city 
feller,  like  you,  should  put  up  with  such  an  uncommon 
hard  night  without  growling." 

"Oh,  that's  nothing  when  you  get  used  to  it,"  said 
Mont,  lightly. 

"But  you  are  getting  used  to  it  sooner  than  I  am," 
replied  Barnard,  with  admiration  for  the  young  city 
fellow's  pluck. 

"There  ain't  much  such  accommodations  in  Boston, 
I  allow?"  said  Hi.  "No  sleepin'  out  in  canvas  tents, 
with  the  water  creeping  under  your  blankets,  in  that 
village,  is  there?'* 

"Well,  no;    but  we  cannot  bring  city  ways  out  on 


ADRIFT  75 

the  plains,  you  know,  Hi;  and  as  long  as  we  have  a 
canvas  roof  over  us,  we  ought  to  be  satisfied  and  thank- 
ful. By  the  way,  I  wonder  how  those  Pike  County 
fellows  got  on  last  night.  They  intend  to  sleep  in  their 
wagon  when  they  have  reduced  their  load,  but  they 
sleep  on  the  ground  now.  Must  have  found  it  a  little 
damp  last  night." 

Barnard  thought  tliat  Bush,  with  his  heifer  and  go- 
cart,  would  be  worse  off  than  anybody  they  knew. 
Bush  was  a  jolly  emigrant,  travelling  all  alone  with  a 
hand-cart  fixed  up  with  shafts,  into  which  was  harnessed 
a  young  cow.  He  had  quarrelled  with  his  partner  at 
Council  Bluffs,  and  had  gone  off  in  a  fit  of  disgust. 
His  entire  worldly  wealth  was  packed  into  the  little 
cart,  with  one  or  two  sacks  of  flour,  some  "side  meat," 
beans,  and  coffee.  His  cooking  apparatus  consisted  of 
a  frying-pan  and  a  tin  pot,  in  which  latter  useful  uten- 
sil he  made  his  coffee  and  cooked  everything  that  could 
not  be  cooked  in  his  frying-pan. 

"I  don't  beheve  Bush  put  in  much  time  singing 
last  night,"  said  Tom.  "If  his  fiddle  wasn't  drowned 
out,  he  was,  I'll  just  bet." 

"There  he  is  now!"  said  Arty,  and  as  he  spoke  they 
saw  Bush's  tall  form  stalking  beside  his  queer  little 
team,  and  rising  over  a  swell  of  the  prairie,  just  ahead. 

At  camping-time  that  night  they  overtook  Bush, 
who  was  as  gay  and  light-spirited  as  ever.     He  hailed 


^G  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

the  boys  with  heartiness,  and  begged  the  privilege  of 
baking  a  cake  of  dough  in  their  camp-stove. 

"The  fact  is,  boys,"  he  explained,  "me  and  Sukey 
had  a  rough  time  of  it  last  night,  and  I  guess  a  hot 
corn-dodger  will  help  us  both  mightily.  Hey,  Suke!" 
he  said,  lovingly,  for  Bush  and  his  vicious  little  cow 
were  on  very  good  terms. 

"Rain?"  he  said  in  answer  to  the  boys'  inquiries. 
"Rain?  Oh,  no,  I  guess  not.  It  didn't  rain  at  all 
worth  mentioning.  It  jest  came  down  on  the  run. 
Well,  it  did.  I  crawled  under  the  go-cart,  where  the 
water  wa'n't  more  than  a  foot  deep.  It  wasn't  dry 
quarters;  but  I  could  have  got  along  as  gay  as  you 
please  only  for  my  legs.  They're  so  all-fired  lengthy 
that  they  stuck  out  and  got  wet.  When  I  pulled  'em 
in,  my  head  stuck  out,  and  when  I  pulled  my  head  in 
agin,  my  legs  stuck  out.  Pity  about  them  legs,  ain't  it, 
boys?"  he  added,  looking  down  at  his  canvas-covered 
limbs.  "Howsomever,  I  thought  of  you  chaps.  I'm 
used  to  it,  but  you  Boston  fellers  ain't  seasoned  yet. 
I  was  camping  by  myself  over  behind  the  divide,  to 
keep  out  of  the  wet,  and  when  I  saw  your  tent  get  up 
and  dust,  I  started  to  lend  you  a  hand.  But  you  cor- 
raled  the  pesky  thing  before  I  could  get  to  you." 

"Much    obleeged,    I'm   sure,"    said    Hi.     "But   we 
caught  her  on  the  critter's  head  afore  she  went  far." 

"Yes,  yes,  a  tent's  a  mighty  onhandy  thing,  I  do  be- 


ADRIFT  ^-j 

lieve.  Good  enough  for  them  that  can't  get  along  with- 
out It;  but  as  for  me,  as  the  revolutionary  feller  said, 
gimme  liberty  or  gimme  death.  I'd  rather  sleep  out 
o   doors. 

"Queer  feller,  that  Bush,"  said  Hi,  when  they  were 
squatted  about  their  camp-table  at  supper-time.  "He's 
tough  as  sole-leather  and  chipper  as  a  cricket.  And  he 
allows  to  go  clean  through  to  Californy  with  that  'ere 
go-cart  and  heifer.  Why,  the  Mormons  will  steal 
him,  his  cow,  and  his  cart,  and  all,  if  he  ever  gets  so 
far  as  Salt  Lake." 

"They'll  be  smart,  then,  for  he  sleeps  with  both  eyes 
open,"  said  Barnard,  who  admired  Bush  very  much 

They  were  camped  in  a  low,  flat  bottom,  by  the  river 
Platte.  Tall  cotton-woods  fringed  the  river-bank,  on 
the  north  side  of  which  the  emigrant  road  then  ran. 
Here  were  wood,  water,  and  grass,  in  plenty;  and  at 
this  generous  camping-ground  many  emigrants  pitched 
their  tents  for  the  night.  After  supper  was  over,  the 
boys  strolled  out  among  the  camps  and  enjoyed  the 
novel  sight.  The  emigrants  had  now  got  into  the  ways 
of  the  plains — ^were  doing  their  own  cooking  and  wash- 
ing, and  put  on  their  roughest  manners  and  roughest 
clothes,  and  were  already  beginning  to  talk  about  the 
Indians.  The  Cheyennes,  it  was  said,  were  very 
troublesome  just  beyond  Fort  Laramie;  and  it  was  re- 
ported that  one  party  of  emigrants  had  been  attacked 
near  the  Point  of  Rocks,  and  all  hands  killed. 


78  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

At  one  camp-fire  where  our  boys  lingered,  Bush  was 
the  centre  of  a  large  party,  to  whom  he  was  singing  his 
one  great  song,  "Lather  and  Shave."  It  was  a  famous 
song  of  many  verses — ninety-nine,  Bush  said;  but  he 
never  had  time  to  sing  them  all,  though  often  invited 
to  give  them.  His  violin  had  so  far  survived  all  mis- 
adventures, and  furnished  lively  music  for  the  com- 
pany. One  handsome  young  fellow,  with  a  tremendous 
voice,  sang  a  ditty  about  emigrating  to  the  gold  mines, 
of  which  the  refrain  was: 

"Ho!  ho!  and  the  way  we  go, 
Digging  up  the  gold  on  the  Sacramento!" 

All  the  bystanders  and  loungers  joined  in  this  chorus 
with  spirit,  the  last  syllable  of  Sacramento  being  shot 
out  with  a  will — "Toe!" 

At  another  camp  they  found  a  forlorn  little  woman 
dandling  a  child  on  her  knee,  sitting  on  a  wagon- 
tongue,  while  her  husband  was  trying  to  get  supper 
under  her  directions.  The  fire  would  not  burn,  the 
man  was  awkward,  and  his  patience  seemed  clean  gone 
as  he  finally  squatted  back  on  the  ground  and  caught 
his  breath,  after  blowing  at  the  fire  until  he  was  red  in 
the  face. 

"Yes,  we've  had  a  powerful  bad  streak  of  luck,"  he 
complained.  "First,  she  took  sick  at  the  Bluffs,"  he 
said,  jerking  his  head  toward  the  woman  on  the  wagon- 


ADRIFT  79 

tongue.  "That  kep'  us  there  nigh  onto  a  month;  and 
my  pard,  he  got  out  of  patience  and  Ht  out  and  left  us. 
Then  the  young  one  up  and  had  the  cholery  yesterday, 
and  we  broke  down  in  that  thar  slew  just  beyond 
Papes's,  and  we  had  to  double  up  teams  twicet  that 
day.  And  now  then  this  yere  blamed  fire  won't  burn, 
and  we  be  agoin'  to  Californy.  We  be,"  he  added, 
with  great  sarcasm.  "I  never  could  build  a  fire;  hit's 
woman's  work,  hit  is!  Oh,  look  at  yer,  smolderin'  and 
smudgin'  thar!"  he  continued,  addressing  the  sulky 
fire.  With  a  sudden  burst  of  rage  he  kicked  the  smok- 
ing embers  to  the  right  and  left  with  his  heavy  boots, 
and  said,  "Blast  Californy!" 

"Here,  let  me  try,"  said  Tom.  "I'm  right  smart  at 
fire  buildin',"  and  the  boy  gathered  the  half-charred 
embers  together,  and  deftly  fanned  a  flame  from  them 
by  wafting  his  hat  before  the  coals,  into  which  he 
poked  some  dry  stems  and  grass.  The  fire  recovered 
itself  cheerily,  and  the  man  looked  down  on  Tom's 
stooping  figure  with  a  sort  of  unwilling  admiration. 
Arthur  did  not  like  the  looks  of  a  husband  who  seemed 
so  indifferent  to  his  wife  and  baby. 

"Here,  give  me  the  baby,"  said  the  boy;  "I'll  tend 
it  while  you  get  your  supper.  And,  Mister,  you  had 
better  look  after  your  cattle.  I  see  they've  got  all 
snarled  up  with  that  ox-chain." 

"Drat  the  cattle!"  said  the  man;  and  he  went  off  to 


8o  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

swear  at  the  poor  beasts  which  had  managed  to  turn 
their  yokes  and  worry  themselves  generally  into  a 
tangle,  while  waiting  for  their  master  to  take  care  of 
them  for  the  night. 

"Don't  mind  him,"  sighed  the  woman,  relinquishing 
the  sick  baby  to  his  volunteer  nurse.  "Don't  mind 
him.  He's  got  a  right  smart  of  a  temper,  and  he  do 
get  contrairywise  when  things  goes  contrairywise,  and 
the  good  Lord  knows  they  have  gone  contrairywise 
ever  since  we  left  the  States.  Now  trot  the  young  one 
easy-hke,  if  he  hollers,  and  I'll  just  rattle  up  some 
supper  for  my  ole  man." 

Arty  held  the  baby  as  tenderly  as  he  could,  softly 
moving  up  and  down  on  his  knee  the  unpleasant-look- 
ing feather  pillow  on  which  it  was  laid.  A  tall  young 
girl  came  around  from  behind  the  wagon;  looked  at 
the  emigrant's  wife,  who  was  kneading  biscuit,  kneel- 
ing on  the  ground;  looked  at  Arthur,  who  was  crooning 
a  little  song  to  the  sick  baby;   and  then  she  remarked: 

"Goodness,  gracious  me!" 

"Nance!"  said  Arthur,  looking  up. 

"Yes,  it's  Nance,"  retorted  the  tall  young  girl,  with 
some  asperity.  "Leastways,  I'm  called  sich  by  folks 
that  haven't  got  no  more  manners  than  they  have 
room  for." 

"Beg  pardon.  Miss  Nancy.  But  you  surprise  me 
so,  you  know." 


ADRIFT  8i 

"I  suppose  you  don't  allow  Fm  surprised.  Oh  no, 
not  the  leastest  bit.  You  a-tending  baby  out  here  on 
the  perarie!  Howsomever,  I  like  it,  I  like  it!  I  declare 
to  gracious,  I  do!"  she  added  in  a  milder  tone.  "It's 
just  what  boys  are  fit  for.  Hope  you've  learned  to 
make  bread  by  this  time.  Scalded  their  flour,  the 
ornery  critters!  Oh,  my!"  and,  overcome  by  the  rec- 
ollection of  that  first  great  experiment  of  the  boys 
when  in  Iowa,  the  tall  young  girl  sat  down  on  the  wagon- 
tongue  and  doubled  herself  up  again. 

"Never  mind,"  she  said,  disengaging  herself  from 
her  laugh.  "If  you'll  come  over  to  our  camp,  I'll  give 
you  some  yeast — real  hop-yeast;  brought  it  all  the 
way  from  loway  myself.  It's  good  enough  to  bust  the 
cover  of  your  camp-kettle  ofi^." 

"Your  camp!  Are  you  going  to  California?"  asked 
Arthur,  with  surprise. 

"Goin'  to  Californy!  Of  course  we  be.  What  else 
do  you  suppose  we'd  be  campin'  out  here  on  the  Platte, 
miles  and  miles  away  from  home,  for?" 

"But  how  did  you  pass  us?" 

"Couldn't  say.  Dad,  he  allowed  he  wouldn't  stop  at 
the  Bluffs  more'n  one  day.  Oh,  he's  got  the  gold  fever 
just  awful!" 

"Was  he  thinking  of  going  to  CaHfornia  when  we 
passed  your  place  in  Iowa?" 

"Couldn't  say.     He  seen  the  folks  piling  by  on  the 


82  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

emigrant  road,  bound  to  the  gold  mines.  He  used  to 
set  on  the  fence  and  swap  Hes  with  'em  by  the  hour, 
and  ma  just  hollerin'  at  him  from  the  back-door  all  the 
while.     Oh,  my!  wasn't  she  mad,  though!" 

"Didn't  she  want  to  come?" 

"Not  at  first;  but  she  got  to  talking  with  some  of  the 
women-folks  on  the  road,  and  then  she  and  dad  talked 
gold  all  night  and  all  day.  They  jest  got  wild.  So 
one  day,  dad,  he  let  the  place,  picked  up  his  traps, 
bundled  us  into  the  wagon,  and  here  we  be." 

"How  do  you  like  it,  as  far  as  you've  got?"  asked 
Tom,  who  by  this  time  had  become  very  much  inter- 
ested in  Nance's  story. 

"Pretty  tolerble-like.     How's  yerself?" 

"Oh,  it's  pretty  good  fun,  all  but  washing  dishes," 
replied  Tom,  bashfully. 

"Washin'  dishes!"  retorted  the  girl,  with  great 
scorn.  "And  you  call  yer  handful  of  tin  plates  and 
things  washin'  dishes.  Don't  I  wish  you  had  to  do 
up  the  dishes  I  had  at  home  in  loway!  Oh,  it's  real 
persimmons,  this, — ^just  nothing  to  do.  Barefooted, 
you  see,"  and  Nance  put  out  a  brown  foot,  to  show 
that  she  had  left  her  shoes  with  civilization. 

"Where's  your  other  fellers?"  she  asked,  "specially 
that  one  that  scalded  his  flour?" 

Arthur  explained  that  they  were  about  the  camps, 
having  tarried  where  Bush  was  playing  his  vioHn  for  a 


ADRIFT  83 

"stag  dance,"  as  it  was  called,  down  by  the  cotton- 
woods. 

"Well,  you  come  over  to  our  camp  to-morrow,  early, 
and  I'll  give  you  some  real  hop-yeast.  It's  worth  a 
hull  raft  of  bakin'  powder  and  self-risers.  We're  off 
at  sun-up.     So  long!"    And  Nance  was  gone. 

"Right  smart  chance  of  a  gal,  that,"  commented  the 
emigrant,  whose  anger  had  cooled,  and  who  was  sitting 
on  an  ox-yoke  contentedly  smoking  his  pipe. 

"So  Miss  Sunbonnet  is  going  to  California,  is  she?" 
said  Barnard,  when  the  boys  related  their  interview 
with  that  young  woman. 

"Yes,"  replied  Arthur,  remembering  Nance's  brown 
foot;  "she's  going  a-digging  up  the  gold  on  the  Sacra- 
men — toe!" 


CHAPTER  VII 

TROUBLE    IN   THE    CAMP 

The  next  few  days  of  travel  were  very  wearisome 
and  tedious.  The  road  was  a  dull  level,  stretching 
along  by  the  banks  of  the  Platte  River.  Repeated 
rains  had  made  the  ground  soft,  and  the  teams  moved 
with  great  difficulty,  for  all  of  the  emigrants  were  loaded 
heavily.  From  Council  Bluffs  to  Salt  Lake  City  was 
an  uninterrupted  wilderness,  with  only  here  and  there 
a  little  trading-post.  The  provisions  consumed  on  the 
trip  could  not  be  replaced  until  the  Mormon  capital 
was  reached;  and  even  at  that  place  only  flour  and 
meat  could  be  bought  at  reasonable  prices.  So  the 
supplies  of  groceries,  clothing,  and  small  goods  needed 
for  the  journey  must  last  from  the  Missouri  to  the 
Sacramento. 

The  weather  was  warm,  and  our  young  emigrants 
found  it  very  uncomfortable  trudging  along  in  the  heat 
of  the  day,  with  the  sun's  rays  pouring  down  upon 
them.  Hi  grumbled  a  great  deal  at  the  disagreeable 
things  he  had  to  encounter.  It  was  disagreeable  walk- 
ing and  disagreeable  driving.     It  was  particularly  dis- 

84 


TROUBLE  IN  THE  CAMP  85 

agreeable  to  be  pursued  as  they  were  by  mosquitoes. 
At  night,  while  they  camped  In  the  flat  valley  of  the 
Platte,  these  pests  were  simply  Intolerable. 

"Let's  make  a  smudge,  boys,"  said  Barnard  one 
night,  when  they  had  In  vain  tried  to  eat  their  supper 
in  comfort.  Clouds  of  mosquitoes  hovered  about  their 
heads,  filling  their  eyes,  ears,  and  noses,  and  making 
the  air  shrill  with  their  music. 

"We  might  as  well  be  smoked  to  death  as  stung  to 
death,"  growled  HI.  "I  never  see  anything  so  dis- 
agreeable.    It's  wuss  than  small-pox." 

So  the  boys  collected  some  hazel-boughs  and  grass, 
made  a  fire  on  the  ground  and  covered  It  with  the  green 
stuflF,  and  soon  had  a  thick  "smudge"  of  stifling  smoke 
about  them.  The  mosquitoes  seemed  to  cough  a  little 
among  themselves,  and  then  they  gradually  withdrew 
In  disgust. 

"That  worries  the  pests,"  said  Mont.  "I  think  I  see 
five  or  six  hundred  of  them  on  that  hazel  brush,  wait- 
ing for  the  thing  to  blow  over;  then  they  will  make 
another  rush  at  us." 

"Yes,"  added  Hi,  "and  there's  one  big  he  feller;  I 
see  him  now,  cavorting  through  the  under-brush  like 
mad.  He  got  some  smoke  in  his  left  eye,  and  he'll 
make  us  smart  for  it  when  he  comes  back.  Ugh!  ugh! 
but  this  smoke  is  wuss  than  git-out.  I  can't  stand  it 
no  longer!"   and  HI,  choking  with  the  effects  of  the 


86  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"smudge,"  seized  his  plate  of  bread  and  bacon,  and  ran. 
The  others  stayed  as  long  as  they  could,  and  then  left 
everything  and  retired  to  a  little  distance  from  the 
fire.  The  mosquitoes  were  ready  for  them,  and  de- 
scended upon  them  in  millions. 

The  boys,  finishing  their  supper  as  best  they  might, 
got  inside  the  tent,  leaving  a  circle  of  smoking  fire-heaps 
all  about  it.  Sleep  was  impossible  that  night.  They 
visited  some  of  the  neighboring  camps,  of  which  there 
were  a  great  many;  and  everybody  was  fighting  mos- 
quitoes. Smoldering  fires  all  about  were  kindled,  and 
public  feeling  ran  very  high  against  the  great  nuisance 
of  the  night.  One  man  remarked  that  there  ought 
to  be  a  mass-meeting  called  and  resolutions  passed. 
Another  suggested  that  the  mosquitoes  were  the 
original  settlers  on  the  place,  and  that  they  had  rights 
which  even  a  white  man  was  bound  to  respect. 

During  the  night,  too,  the  cattle,  which  were  chained 
up  as  usual,  were  so  frantic  with  the  annoyance  that 
they  were  in  danger  of  injuring  themselves.  They 
ran  to  and  fro  with  their  short  allowance  of  chain, 
snorted,  tore  the  earth,  and  lashed  themselves  into  a 
frenzy.  It  was  decided  to  unyoke  them  and  take  the 
chances  of  finding  them  in  the  morning.  Tige,  as 
soon  as  he  was  at  liberty,  walked  deliberately  up  to 
one  of  the  smudge  fires,  where  he  turned  his  tail  toward 
it  and  stood  contentedly  chewing  his  cud. 


TROUBLE   IN  THE  CAMP  87 

"Sagacious  Tige,"  said  Mont,  "I  believe  I  will  fol- 
low your  example." 

Tige  appreciated  this  compliment,  apparently,  for  he 
lay  down,  having  tested  the  value  of  smoke  as  a  shield 
against  mosquitoes.  Mont  rolled  himself  in  his  blan- 
ket and  lay  down  by  another  fire,  and  managed  to 
sleep  almost  as  well  as  Tige.  The  others  did  the  same, 
though  it  was  hard  work  to  keep  up  the  fires  and 
find  sleep  also.  Arthur  woke  up  long  before  daybreak, 
with  the  insects  buzzing  and  stinging  about  his  face. 
He  jumped  up  in  sheer  desperation  and  ran  wildly  out 
on  the  level  road,  half  a  mile  or  more,  without  stopping. 
He  could  hear  the  bodies  of  the  mosquitoes  striking 
on  his  hat  as  he  fled.  Then  he  turned  and  ran  back 
again,  leaving  a  long  train  of  the  pests  behind  him. 
But  they  caught  up  with  him  by  the  time  he  had  reached 
the  camp.  In  despair,  he  covered  his  head  with  a 
blanket,  and  sat  down  by  a  tree  trunk  to  sleep  again, 
having  first  stirred  up  a  good  smudge  for  Tige,  who 
looked  on  complacently  at  this  provision  for  his  com- 
fort. Arthur  stooped  and  brushed  a  few  mosquitoes 
from  Tige's  black  muzzle,  and  the  steer  looked  up  at 
him  intelligently,  as  if  to  say,  "Hard  lines,  these,  my 
boy." 

"Arouse  ye!  arouse  ye!  my  merry  Swiss  boys!" 
sang  Mont,  bright  and  early  next  morning,  while  the 
rest  of  the  party  were  yet  struggling  with  mosquitoes 


88  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

in  their  dreams.  "We  have  a  long  drive  to  the  cross- 
ing of  Loup  Fork,  to-day;  and  if  we  don't  get  there  in 
good  season,  we  shall  have  to  wait  a  whole  day  to  get 
a  chance  on  the  ferry." 

The  boys  turned  out  of  their  various  lairs  with  many 
expressions  of  discomfort.  They  had  just  had  a  tire- 
some day's  travel  and  almost  no  rest  at  all.  The  air 
was  now  moist  and  warm,  with  the  promise  of  another 
hot  day.  They  were  smarting  with  mosquito  bites, 
and  were  generally  uncomfortable. 

"Well,  I  allow  this  is  reely  disagreeable,"  said  Hi, 
half  sitting  up,  clasping  his  hands  across  his  knees,  and 
looking  excessively  miserable. 

The  picture  of  Hi,  squatted  there  forlornly,  with  his 
hat  crumpled  over  his  head,  his  face  blotched  with 
bites,  and  his  eyes  heavy  with  sleep,  was  too  funny  for 
Barnard,  who  laughed  outright  and  said: 

"Well,  I  declare.  Hi,  but  you  do  look  like  the  very 
last  rose  of  summer  that  ever  was!" 

"See  here,  Barney  Crogan!"  said  Hi,  angrily,  "I 
don't  want  none  of  your  sass.  And  I  jest  give  you 
notice  of  that." 

"What  are  you  going  to  do  about  it?"  sharply  re- 
plied Barnard,  who  felt  his  anger  rising.  "You  sit 
there  like  a  bump  on  a  log,  saying  that  things  are  'dis- 
agreeable,' and  I  don't  see  that  that  helps  it." 

"Well,  I  don't  want  anybody's  chin  about  it — that's 


TROUBLE   IN  THE  CAMP  89 

what  I  don't  want.  And  I  allow  I  ain't  agoin'  to  stand 
no  nonsense  from  a  feller  that  don't  take  his  regular 
spell  at  drivin'." 

"What  do  you  mean?"  said  Barnard,  advancing 
threateningly  toward  Hi,  who,  by  this  time,  had  risen 
to  his  feet  and  stood  with  his  blanket  still  clinging 
about  him.  ''What  do  you  mean?  If  you  mean  to 
say  that  I  don't  do  my  share  of  work,  I'll " 

"Oh,  stop!  stop!  boys,"  interposed  Mont.  "There's 
really  no  use  of  quarreling.  I  suppose  we  all  feel  cross 
and  unhappy,  after  such  a  miserable  night.  I'm  sure 
I  do.     But  we  needn't  quarrel." 

"Who's  quarrelin',  I'd  like  to  know.  I  ain't.  It's 
that  stuck-up " 

But  before  he  had  time  to  finish  his  sentence,  Mont 
had  playfully  put  his  hand  on  Hi's  mouth,  saying: 

"Well,  I  know;  I  am  a  stuck-up  Boston  chap,  but 
I'll  try  to  get  over  it." 

Barnard  was  secretly  amused  at  this  ingenious  turn, 
but  he  was  too  angry  to  say  anything,  and  he  turned 
his  attention  to  the  cattle. 

Tom  and  Johnny,  the  latter  somewhat  alarmed  at 
the  warlike  appearance  of  things  in  camp,  scoured  the 
under-brush  for  dry  wood  for  their  breakfast  fire. 

"If  Barney  had  sassed  me  like  that,"  commented 
Tom,  when  out  of  earshot  of  his  elders,  "I  would  have 
punched  his  head  for  him." 


90  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"Appears  to  me  that  Hi  had  no  cause  to  fire  up  so 
— Barney  didn't  mean  anything;  and  I'm  sure  Hi 
did  look  queer-like,  sitting  there  with  his  hat  mussed 
and  his  head  all  swelled  up." 

"I'll  swell  your  head  for  ye,  yer  ongrateful  little 
weasel.  Yer  always  takin'  Crogan's  side" — and  Tom 
dealt  him  a  blow  behind  the  ear.  Johnny  tumbled 
over  a  clump  of  brush,  crying,  not  so  much  with  pain 
as  with  anger  and  mortification.  Tom  only  muttered, 
"You  can't  sass  me,  you  know." 

Loaded  with  their  fuel,  they  went  back  to  the  camp, 
where  Arthur,  with  a  lowering  brow,  was  busy  over  the 
fire,  making  ready  for  breakfast. 

"What's  the  matter  with  you?'''  he  asked  with  amaze- 
ment and  some  asperity,  as  he  noticed  the  tears  on 
Johnny's  face. 

"I  punched  his  head  for  his  sass,"  said  Tom,  de- 
fiantly. 

Without  a  word,  Arthur  banged  Tom  over  the  head 
with  the  sheet-iron  stove-cover,  which  he  happened  to 
have  in  his  hand.  The  boy  felt  the  indignity,  for  his 
face  was  covered  with  soot  and  his  eyes  smarted. 
But,  before  he  could  get  at  Arthur,  who  stood  by  the 
stove,  his  eyes  sparkling,  and  his  lithe  young  form 
swelling  with  anger,  Mont  seized  Tom  and  drew  him 
away.  Johnny  threw  himself  on  Arty  and  entreated 
him  not  to  fight  on  his  account,  meanwhile  protesting 
that  it  was  nothing  at  all. 


TROUBLE   IN  THE  CAMP  91 

Luckily  the  other  late  combatants  were  not  at  hand, 
and  Mont,  helping  Tom  to  remove  the  soot  from  his 
face  and  hair,  soothed  his  angry  feelings  and  asked 
him  to  promise  to  leave  off  quarreling. 

"You  shouldn't  have  struck  little  Johnny;  you 
know  that,  Tom.  He  is  a  little  chap,  much  smaller 
than  you,  and  it  was  a  cowardly  thing  for  you  to  knock 
him  over." 

"But  that's  no  reason  why  Art  should  whack  me 
over  the  snoot  with  a  griddle,"  answered  the  lad. 

"Certainly  not,  certainly  not;  but  he  did  that  in  a 
moment  of  passion.  I  dare  say  he  is  sorry  for  it  by 
this  time.  If  he  is  not,  .1  shall  be  sorry  for  Arty;  he 
usually  means  to  do  what  is  right.  It  was  wrong  for 
him  to  strike  you;  there's  no  doubt  about  that.  But 
you  will  forgive  him,  if  he  asks  you?" 

"I  allow  he  won't  ask,"  said  Tom,  witli  great  grim- 
ness. 

"But  if  he  does?" 

"All  right,  let  him  come  on.  I'm  ready  for  him, 
anyway." 

It  was  not  a  merry  party  which  sat  down  to  break- 
fast together  that  morning.  Mont  found  It  difficult  to 
keep  up  an  animated  conversation.  HI  had  only  one 
word,  and  that  was  "disagreeable."  Perhaps  they 
should  not  have  eaten  much  breakfast,  as  the  usual 
result   of  bad   feelings   is   to  destroy  one's   appetite. 


92  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

On  the  plains  this  rule  does  not  always  hold  good.  I 
am  bound  to  say  that  they  ate  very  heartily,  for  they 
had  had  almost  no  supper  on  the  night  before. 

When  the  cattle  were  yoked  up  and  the  caravan  was 
ready  to  move,  Mont  picked  up  the  whip  and  said,  with 
a  cheery  look  at  the  others: 

"Let  me  drive  to-day." 

*'You  can't,"  said  Hi,  stiffly,  but  not  unkindly. 

"Let  me  try,"  and  Mont  moved  off  with  the  team  as 
steadily  as  if  he  had  driven  oxen  all  his  life.  He  had 
watched  the  driving  of  Hi  and  Barnard,  and  had  prac- 
tised some  with  the  cattle  when  they  were  turned  out 
at  noon,  yoked  together,  for  a  short  rest.  Molly,  the 
skittish  little  cow,  would  occasionally  "gee,"  or  bolt 
out  of  the  track,  which  was  always  a  great  source  of 
annoyance  even  to  Hi,  for  Molly  was  on  the  "off" 
side,  and  it  was  sometimes  necessary  to  run  around 
the  head  of  the  cattle  to  get  the  mischievous  animal 
back  into  the  track  again.  But  Mont  got  on  capitally; 
he  walked  by  the  side  of  the  docile  and  knowing  Tige, 
who  seemed  able  to  keep  all  the  rest  of  the  team  in 
good  spirits.  Tige  was  fond  of  potatoes,  sugar,  bread, 
and  many  other  luxuries  usually  denied  to  cattle,  and 
Mont  kept  on  good  terms  with  the  queer  little  steer 
by  carrying  the  odds  and  ends  of  his  own  rations  in  his 
pocket  for  Tige. 

But  even  Tige's  good-nature,  combined  with  Mont's, 


TROUBLE   IN  THE  CAMP  93 

could  not  cheer  up  the  rest  of  the  party.  Little 
Johnny,  perched  on  old  Jim's  back,  paced  along  be- 
side the  wagon,  never  galloping  off  on  brief  excursions 
by  the  roadside,  as  he  usually  did  when  allowed  to  ride 
the  horse.  Hi  trudged  along  sulkily  behind;  Arthur 
walked  on  ahead  to  Loup  Fork  Ferry;  and  Barney,  in 
defiance  of  rules  and  usage,  climbed  into  the  wagon, 
where,  on  top  of  the  load  and  close  against  the  wagon- 
bows,  he  went  to  sleep. 

Before  noon  they  reached  the  ferry,  so  long  looked 
for  and  talked  about.  The  Loup  is  one  of  the  forks  of 
the  Platte,  and  in  those  days  it  was  crossed  by  a  rope- 
ferry,  which  some  enterprising  man  had  put  in  there. 
A  long  scow,  large  enough  to  take  on  two  wagons,  with 
the  usual  number  of  cattle,  slid  across  the  stream,  at- 
tached by  slings  and  pulleys  to  a  rope  tightly  stretched 
from  shore  to  shore.  The  current  was  'swift,  and,  by 
keeping  the  scow  partly  headed  up  stream,  the  pres- 
sure forced  the  unwieldy  craft  across. 

Here  were  numerous  teams  waiting  their  chance  to 
cross,  each  being  numbered  in  turn.  Some  of  them 
had  waited  two  days  for  their  turn  to  come;  but  to- 
day their  number  had  been  reduced  by  the  departure 
of  several  who  had  gone  to  a  place  farther  up  the  Fork, 
where  it  was  reported  that  a  ford  had  been  found. 
Our  party  ascertained  that  they  could  cross  by  sun- 
down;   so   they   unhitched    their   cattle   and   waited, 


94  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

having  first  paid  the  ten  dollars  for  ferriage  which  the 
avaricious  ferry-keeper  demanded  for  each  team. 

The  young  fellows  took  this  opportunity  to  rest. 
Barnard  sat  lazily  on  the  bank  angling  for  catfish. 
Hi  climbed  into  the  wagon  and  went  to  sleep.  Mont 
chatted  with  the  ferry-master,  who  sat  in  the  doorway 
of  his  log  hut  and  surveyed  the  busy  scene  below  him 
with  the  air  of  a  wealthy  proprietor. 

"I  should  suppose  that  you  would  get  the  gold  fever, 
seeing  so  many  people  pressing  on  to  the  mines,"  said 
Mont. 

The  ferryman  chuckled,  and  waving  his  pipe  toward 
the  rude  ferry,  said: 

"Thar's  my  gold  mine.     Ten  dollars  a  pop." 

"Yes,  that's  so.  I  suppose  you  are  making  a  mint 
of  money." 

"Not  so  dreffle  much,  not  so  dreflle  much,"  the  man 
replied,  uneasily.  "Ye  see,  repa'rs  and  w'ar  and  t'ar 
are  mighty  bindin'  on  a  man,  cl'ar  out  hyar  on  the 
plains.  Why,  I  hev  to  go  cl'ar  to  K'arney  for  every 
scrap  of  anything." 

"But  your  receipts  must  be  enormous.  Let  me  see. 
You  can  make  at  least  twelve  trips  a  day;  you  get, 
say,  twenty  dollars  a  trip,  sometimes  more,  and  that 
is  two  hundred  and  forty  dollars  a  day." 

"Powerful  smart  on  figgers  you  be,  young  feller," 
said  the  man,  and  he  laughed  with  a  cunning  leer  in 
his  eye  at  Mont. 


TROUBLE  IN  THE  CAMP  95 

Meanwhile,  Tom  leaned  over  the  slight  fence  with 
which  the  ferryman  had  inclosed  his  "garding,"  as  he 
called  it.  The  boy  coveted  the  young  onions  just  be- 
ginning to  show  their  bulbs  half  out  of  the  warm  soil; 
and  he  meditated  on  the  scarcity  of  potatoes  which 
their  appetites  were  making  in  their  own  stores.  Ar- 
thur came  up  and  laid  his  hand  on  Tom's  shoulder, 
and  looked  over  too. 

"Looks  something  like  home,  don't  it,  Tom?" 

"Yes,"  replied  Tom.  "I  was  just  a-thinkin'  how 
dad  never  would  plant  garden  truck.  Always  wheat, 
wheat,  wheat.  Blast  the  wheat,  when  a  feller  has  to 
go  to  the  neighbors  for  garden  sass." 

"But,  then,  we  sometimes  get  *sass'  without  going 
for  it,"  said  Arty,  with  a  smile. 

Tom's  face  darkened  at  this  allusion  to  the  diffi- 
culties of  the  morning;  but  Arty  continued: 

"I  am  real  sorry,  Tom,  that  I  struck  you  as  I  did. 
It  was  awful  mean,  and  I  didn't  intend  it." 

"Yes,  you  did.     How  else  could  you  done  it?" 

"Well,  Tom,  it's  a  hard  case  to  explain.  My  hand 
just  flew  up  before  I  knew  what  I  was  about.  The 
first  thing  I  knew  I  had  hit  you.  Come  now,  I  as- 
sure you  I  am  sorry,  and  I  want  to  make  up." 

"All  right,"  grumbled  Tom. 

"You  forgive  me,  honor  bright?  Well,  give  us  your 
hand." 

Tom  looked   around   awkwardly   at  Arthur,   for  he 


96  THE   BOY   EMIGRANTS 

had  kept  his  eyes  fixed  on  the  onion-bed  during  this 
brief  dialogue.  He  glanced  into  Arthur's  pleasant 
boyish  face,  and  said  frankly: 

"Quits!  we'll  call  it  square,  and  there's  my  fist 
on  It. 

As  the  sun  began  to  drop  behind  the  horizon,  the  turn 
for  our  young  party  to  cross  came  at  last.  They  had 
waited  nearly  ten  hours,  and  were  right  glad  when 
they  were  able  to  see  the  way  across  clear  for  them. 
The  scow  could  not  reach  the  farther  shore,  as  there 
was  a  long  shallow  all  along  that  side.  So  the  clumsy 
craft  was  run  across  until  it  grounded;  then  a  wooden 
flap  or  apron  was  let  down,  and  the  teams  were  driven 
out  into  the  water,  wading  the  rest  of  the  way.  It 
was  a  poor  way  of  crossing  a  stream,  but  it  was  the 
best  practicable  then  and  there. 

With  much  hallooing,  shouting,  and  running  hither 
and  thither,  the  cattle  were  driven  into  the  scow.  The 
current  was  swift  and  the  channel  deep;  the  cross- 
ing looked  perilous,  especially  when  the  cattle  were 
restive.  Molly  was  particularly  troublesome,  and  Hi 
went  around  on  that  side  to  quiet  her.  She  would  not 
be  quieted,  and  with  one  vicious  toss  of  her  horns, 
she  lifted  Hi  by  his  leather  belt.  In  an  instant  he 
was  overboard,  struggling  in  the  stream. 

No  one  else  was  on  that  side  of  the  boat;  but  Barney 
saw  the   accident,   and  exclaiming,   "He  can't  swim! 


TROUBLE  IN  THE  CAMP  97 

he  can't  swim!"  rushed  around  to  the  rear  of  the  craft, 
pulHng  off  his  clothes  as  he  ran. 

All  was  confusion,  the  scow  being  crowded  with  men, 
cattle,  and  teams.  The  frail  craft  quivered  in  the  tide, 
while  the  startled  boatmen  were  puzzled  what  to  do. 
Diving  under  the  rear  wagon,  Barney  reached  the  gun- 
wale of  the  boat  just  in  time  to  see  Hi's  hands  clutch 
ineffectually  at  the  edge.  He  made  a  lunge  and  seized 
one  hand  as  it  disappeared,  and,  falling  on  his  knees, 
reached  over  and  seized  Hi's  shoulders. 

''Never  mind,  Barney  boy,  I'm  on  bottom,"  said  Hi. 
Just  then  he  stood  on  his  feet,  and  the  boat  grounded  on 
the  shoal. 

Barnard  drew  a  long  sigh  of  relief,  and  looked  for  an 
instant  straight  down  into  Hi's  blue  eyes.  They  were 
friends  again. 

Hi  was  helped  on  board,  none  the  worse  for  his  un- 
expected ducking.  They  drove  off  the  scow,  waded 
across  the  shoal,  and  struggled  up  the  bank  with  much 
turmoil  and  bother.  They  camped  near  the  river,  and 
surrounded  themselves  with  a  cordon  of  smudge-fires. 
The  mosquitoes  troubled  them  very  much;  but,  not- 
withstanding that,  they  passed  the  evening  cheerily. 
Tom  observed,  with  much  inward  surprise,  that  Hi 
had  exchanged  his  wet  clothes  for  a  spare  suit  of  Bar- 
ney's. 

And  yet  Hi  had  clothes  enough  of  his  own. 


CHAPTER  VIII 

SOME  NEW  ACQUAINTANCES 

For  many  days  after  leaving  Columbus,  as  the 
ferryman  facetiously  called  his  log-house,  our  emigrants 
traveled  with  an  immense  company.  One  train  alone 
had  nearly  two  hundred  head  of  cattle,  either  in  yoke 
or  loose,  and  fifteen  wagons.  It  was  a  brave  sight  to 
see  this  long  caravan  winding  along  the  track,  with  its 
white-covered  wagons  gleaming  in  the  sun,  and  the 
animals  walking  along  behind  in  the  most  orderly 
manner.  Many  of  the  men  were  on  horseback,  and 
skirmished  to  the  rear,  to  the  front,  or  by  the  flanks  of 
the  train  as  it  moved.  Arthur  declared  that  it  looked 
like  a  traveling  circus  or  menagerie,  a  comparison 
which  was  made  more  striking  by  the  dress  of  the  emi- 
grants. They  wore  all  sorts  of  queer  garments,  which 
they  had  picked  up  from  abandoned  camps.  In  those 
days  of  the  gold  rush,  people  were  reckless  about  waste, 
and  the  trail  was  strewn,  in  many  places,  with  valu- 
able goods,  thrown  away  by  emigrants  who  were  in 
such  haste  to  get  on  that  they  were  continually  over- 
hauling their  loads  to  see  what  they  could  leave  behind 

to  lighten  them. 

98 


SOME  NEW  ACQUAINTANCES  99 

These  things  were  picked  up  by  those  who  came 
after  only  to  be  again  thrown  out  for  others  to  find 
and  reject.  One  of  the  emigrants,  attached  to  this  long 
Missouri  train,  wore  a  woman's  straw  bonnet,  of  the 
Shaker  pattern,  with  a  large  green  cape.  Another  was 
decorated  with  a  richly  embroidered  hunting-frock  of 
Pawnee  make;  and  he  wore  a  black  silk  *' stove-pipe" 
hat,  surmounted  with  a  tall  eagle-plume.  Some  of 
the  women  of  this  company  rode  well,  and  one  little 
girl,  riding  a  fiery  Texan  pony,  seated  astride,  excited 
much  admiration  by  her  skilful  management  of  her 
steed.  A  party  of  Pawnees,  who  had  lodges,  or  "te- 
pees," near  by,  grouped  themselves  on  a  little  knoll 
and  gazed  on  this  passing  show  with  great  solemnity. 

At  camping-time,  some  of  these  red  children  of  the 
desert  came  to  the  tent  of  our  young  emigrants  beg- 
ging and  selling  moccasins.  The  Pawnee  moccasin  is 
a  plain,  inartistic  affair,  shaped  almost  exactly  like  the 
foot  of  a  stocking,  with  one  seam  running  from  the 
heel  downward  and  lengthwise  through  the  sole  and  up 
to  the  instep  over  the  toe.  But  as  these  were  the  first 
of  "wild  Indian"  manufacture  that  the  boys  had  ever 
seen,  each  was  eager  to  secure  at  least  one  pair. 

The  Indians  were  dressed  in  buckskin  hunting-shirts 
and  leggings,  were  bareheaded,  and  wore  a  coarse 
blanket  slung  about  them.  One  of  them  produced 
from  a  dirty  buckskin  pouch  a  piece  of  paper,  which 


gflSlA-Sf 


loo  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

he  impressively  submitted  to  Mont,  as  the  apparent 
leader  of  the  party,  saying,  as  he  did  so,  "Heap  good 
Indian  me!"    The  paper  read  as  follows: 

This  Indian,  Mekonee,  otherwise  known  as  The-Man-that- 
Champs-with-his-Teeth,  wants  a  recommendation.  I  give  it  with 
pleasure.  He  is  a  lying,  thieving,  vagabond  Pawnee.  He  will 
steal  the  tires  off  of  your  wagon-wheels  and  the  buttons  from  your 
trousers.     Watch  him. 

(Signed)     Jake  Dawson, 
And  thirteen  others  of  the  Franklin  Grove  Company. 

"Heap  good  Indian  me,"  said  The-Man-that- 
Champs-with-his-Teeth,  when  the  boys  had  examined 
his  document. 

"Oh,  yes,"  said  Hi,  "I  allow  you  are  the  only  good 
Indian  that  ain't  dead  yet." 

The-Man-that-Champs-with-his-Teeth  assented  with 
a  grunt  of  approval,  folded  up  his  "recommendation" 
and  put  it  carefully  away,  as  a  very  precious  thing. 
While  he  was  walking  softly  about  the  camp,  as  if 
looking  for  something  to  steal,  another  of  the  tribe 
dived  into  the  bosom  of  his  hunting-shirt  and  extracted 
a  lump  of  dough.  Holding  it  out  to  Arthur,  who  was 
getting  ready  the  supper,  he  made  signs  toward  the 
stove  and  said,  "Cook  him.^" 

Arthur  assented,  but  Barnard  cried,  "No,  no,  Ar- 
thur! Don't  let  that  dirty  fellow's  dough  go  into  our 
oven.  He  has  stolen  it  somewhere,  and  has  carried  it 
about  in  his  dirty  clothes,  nobody  knows  how  long." 


SOME  NEW  ACQUAINTANCES  loi 

"I'll  let  him  cook  it  on  top  of  the  stove  then,"  said 
Arthur;  and  the  Pawnee  put  his  cake  on  the  outside  of 
the  camp-stove,  where  Arthur  covered  it  with  a  tin 
dish.  The  Indian,  with  an  expression  of  intense  satis- 
faction, squatted  by  the  hot  stove,  and  never  took  his 
eyes  off  of  it  until  his  dough  was  bread  and  delivered, 
blazing  hot,  into  his  hand. 

The  Indians  carried  bows  and  arrows,  and  one  had  a 
battered  army  musket,  which  he  declared,  proudly,  was 
"heap  good — killed  buffalo  six  mile  off."  This  piece 
of  brag  tickled  Hi  so  much  that  the  Indian  seized  that 
opportunity  to  beg  powder,  shot,  or  lead.  These  were 
not  given  him;  and  he  renewed  his  application  for 
"whisk"  (whisky)  or  "sugee"  (sugar),  both  of  which 
the  Indians  particularly  hanker  after.  These  persis- 
tent beggars  got  very  little  for  their  trouble,  Arthur 
having  vainly  interceded  in  behalf  of  The-Man-that- 
Champs-with-his-Teeth,  who  offered  to  give  "heap 
moccasin"  for  a  red  silk  handkerchief  of  Barnard's 
which  he  very  much  desired. 

"Where  you  from?"  asked  the  Indian,  as  if  at- 
tracted by  Arthur's  good-natured  and  pleasant  face. 

"From  Richardson,  Lee  County,  Illinois,"  said  Ar- 
thur. "You  know  it  is  the  land  of  the  prairie,  one  of 
the  great  States  that  belongs  to  your  Great  Father  and 
mine.  The  people  in  that  land  are  many;  they  are 
like  the  leaves  on  the  trees,  they  are  so  many.     They 


I02  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

are  going  to  the  land  of  the  setting  sun,  where  the  gold 
shines  in  the  waters  of  the  Sacramento.  The  pale- 
faces are  covering  the  continent.  They  will  leave  no 
room  for  the  red  man,  the  deer,  and  the  buffalo.  Are 
you  not  sorry  for  this?" 

"Whisk,"  said  the  red  man,  stolidly. 

"A  good  oration,  Arty!"  laughed  Mont.  "But  Mr. 
Man-that-Champs-with-his-Teeth  don't  understand  it. 
He  understands  'whisk'  and  'sugee,'  and  he  don't  care 
for  the  pale-faces  as  long  as  he  gets  these.  Look  out! 
there  goes  the  cover  of  your  camp-kettle!" 

Arthur  turned  just  in  time  to  see  the  Indian  who 
was  squatted  by  the  stove  calmly  fold  his  arms  over  a 
suspicious  bunch  in  his  blanket.  Mont  stalked  over, 
pulled  the  blanket  from  the  Indian's  unresisting  arm, 
and  the  iron  cover  rolled  out  upon  the  ground.  The 
copper-colored  rascal  smiled  cunningly,  as  one  should 
say,  "I  missed  it  that  time,  but  never  mind.  It's  a 
good  joke  on  me."  After  that  the  boys  mounted  guard 
at  night-watch  and  watch,  as  they  had  been  told  long 
before  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  do  while  passing 
through  the  Indian  country. 

Next  to  "wild"  Indians,  the  boys  longed  for  a  sight 
of  the  buffalo  on  his  native  plain.  This  came  in  due 
time.  They  had  passed  up  the  long  tongue  of  land 
which  lies  between  Loup  Fork  and  the  Platte,  and  had 
reached  a  small  stream  making  in  from  the  north  and 


SOME  NEW  ACQUAINTANCES  103 

known  as  Wood  River.  Crossing  this,  they  bore  off 
to  the  northwest,  with  the  little  river  on  their  right. 

One  hot  afternoon,  while  the  party  were  wearily 
dragging  themselves  along,  Barnard  went  ahead  with 
the  horse  to  spy  out  a  good  camping-place.  Arthur 
walked  on  in  advance  of  the  team  in  the  dusty  road,  half 
asleep,  and  feeling  as  if  he  should  be  happy  if  he  could 
fall  down  in  the  dust  and  take  a  long  nap.  It  was  very 
tiresome,  this  continual  tramp,  tramp,  tramp,  with  each 
day's  journey  making  almost  no  difference  in  their 
progress.  Arthur  grumbled  to  himself,  and  scarcely 
heard  the  boyish  talk  of  Johnny,  who  trudged  along  with 
him.  Once  in  a  while  he  felt  himself  dropping  to  sleep 
as  he  walked.  His  heavy  eyes  closed;  he  lost  sight  of 
the  yellow  wagon-track,  the  dusty  grass,  and  the  earth, 
which  seemed  to  reel;  the  blinding  glare  of  the  sun 
was  gone  for  an  instant,  and  he  stumbled  on  as  in  a 
dream.  Then  he  nearly  fell  over  forward,  and  he  knew 
that  he  had  slept  by  the  painful  start  of  awaking.  He 
looked  dreamily  at  the  rough  soil  by  the  side  of  the 
trail,  dimly  longing  to  lie  down  and  sleep,  sleep, 
sleep. 

Johnny  said:  "Oh  my!  Arty!  what  big  black  cat- 
tle!" 

Arty  looked  languidly  across  the  river,  which  was 
here  only  a  narrow,  woody  creek.  In  an  instant  his 
sleepiness  was  gone. 


I04  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"Buffalo!  buffalo?"  he  shouted,  and,  very  wide 
awake  indeed,  ran  back  to  the  wagon.  He  was  in  a 
fever  of  excitement,  and  the  news  he  brought  set  his 
comrades  into  commotion.  Each  rushed  for  his  fa- 
vorite fire-arm.  Tom  extracted  his  long-unused  re- 
volver from  the  wagon,  where  it  lay  unloaded. 

"Now,  boys,  we  can't  all  go  over  the  creek,"  said 
Hi.  "You,  Tom,  stay  here  with  the  team.  Mont, 
Arty,  and  I  will  go  over  and  see  if  we  can  knock  over 
a  brace  of  them  buffalo." 

Tom  handled  his  revolver  with  a  very  bad  grace,  but 
was  mollified  when  Johnny  said  he  would  stay,  and  per- 
haps they  might  see  the  buffalo  cross  over  and  break 
through  the  woods  below.  The  banks  of  the  creek 
were  filled  with  a  thick  growth  of  box-elders,  but 
through  some  of  the  gaps  they  could  see  five  buffalo 
quietly  feeding  in  a  V-shaped  meadow  formed  by  the 
junction  of  two  small  branches  of  Wood  River. 

"We  must  get  above  them,"  said  Hi,  as  they  were 
reconnoitering,  "or  they  will  make  off  by  that  open 
place.  If  we  take  'em  in  the  rear  they  can't  mizzle  so 
easy-like." 

Mont  thought  it  unsafe  to  go  to  the  upper  part  of 
the  meadow,  because  the  wind  came  from  that  direc- 
tion. "And  they  are  very  sensitive  to  any  unusual 
odor  in  the  air,"  added  Arthur.  "They  can  smell  a 
man  two  miles  off,  when  they  are  to  the  leeward." 


SOME  NEW  ACQUAINTANCES  105 

The  boy  was  trembling  with  excitement  at  the  sight 
of  this  large  game,  but  he  remembered  his  natural 
history  for  all  that.  Even  as  he  spoke  one  of  the  feed- 
ing buffalo  lifted  his  large  shaggy  head  and  sniffed  sus- 
piciously to  the  windward. 

The  three  young  fellows  separated,  Arthur  going 
down  the  creek,  Hi  up  toward  the  open,  and  Mont 
crossing  in  the  middle  of  the  V,  directly  opposite  where 
the  animals  were  feeding.  They  were  huge  fellows, 
ponderously  moving  about  and  nibbling  the  short, 
tender  grass.  Their  humped  shoulders  were  covered 
with  dark,  shaggy  hair,  and  their  long,  beard-like 
dewlaps  nearly  swept  the  ground  as  they  bent  their 
heads  to  graze.  They  were  not  in  very  good  condition, 
apparently,  and  the  hide  of  one  of  them  was  clouded 
with  a  dingy,  yellowish  tinge.  "Just  like  our  old  buf- 
falo-robe," secretly  commented  Arthur  to  himself,  as 
he  lay  breathless,  near  the  creek,  waiting  for  a  signal 
from  Hi. 

Suddenly,  to  his  amazement,  a  shot  burst  out  from 
the  brush  on  the  farther  side  of  the  meadow,  and,  as 
the  alarmed  animals  dashed  away  like  cats,  another 
report  banged  out  from  the  same  spot.  The  buffalo, 
scattering  in  different  directions,  were  almost  immedi- 
ately out  of  reach.  Two  pitched  down  into  the  creek 
near  where  they  were  feeding  and  disappeared  in  the 
woods  beyond.     One  broke  through  the  timber  just 


io6  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

below  where  Arthur  was  posted,  scrambled  across  the 
stream,  and,  with  incredible  agility,  crashed  through 
into  the  road  near  the  wagon,  where  Tom  gallantly, 
but  ineffectually,  assaulted  him  with  his  "pepper- 
box" revolver  as  he  galloped  away.  The  fourth  raced 
up  the  V-shaped  meadow,  receiving  a  shot  each  from 
Mont's  musket  and  Hi's  rifle  in  his  rapid  flight.  The 
fifth  made  as  if  he  would  plunge  down  into  the  creek 
at  the  foot  of  the  meadow,  but,  baulked  by  something, 
turned  and  raced  up  the  side  of  the  triangle  next  the 
road,  heading  directly  for  Arthur,  who  was  concealed 
behind  a  bush.  "Now  or  never,"  said  the  boy,  with 
his  heart  standing  still  and  his  eye  glancing  along  the 
sights  of  his  rifle.  The  buffalo  was  coming  directly 
toward  him,  his  head  down  and  his  enormous  feet 
pounding  the  earth.  Arthur  fired,  and  the  buffalo 
swerved  sharply  to  the  right;  at  the  same  instant 
another  shot  came  from  the  opposite  side  of  the 
meadow.  The  buffalo  ambled  on  for  a  few  paces,  fell 
on  his  knees,  dug  his  horns  madly  into  the  ground, 
rolled  over  on  his  side,  and  was  still. 

As  Arthur,  scarcely  believing  his  eyes,  ran  out  into 
the  open,  a  tall  young  fellow,  carrying  a  double-bar- 
reled shot-gun,  rushed  up  from  the  other  side,  and 
drawing  his  hunting-knife,  cut  the  animal's  throat. 
There  was  no  need.     The  great  creature  was  dead. 

"My  fust  buffalo,"  said  the  stranger,  drawing  him- 


SOME  NEW  ACQUAINTANCES  107 

self  up  proudly.  Arthur  looked  on,  with  his  heart 
beating,  and  said:  "I  fired  at  him  too." 

All  this  took  place  in  a  very  few  minutes.  The  firing 
in  all  directions  was  almost  simultaneous.  Mont  and 
Hi  came  running  up,  chagrined  at  their  ill  luck,  but 
excited  by  the  sight  of  the  first  slain  buffalo. 

"Who  shot  him?"  eagerly  cried  Hi,  who  had  not 
seen  what  happened  below  him. 

"Well,  I  allow  that  I'm  the  fortnit  individual,"  said 
the  stranger.  "Leastways,  that's  my  mark,"  and  he 
inserted  his  finger  into  a  smooth  round  hole  in  the 
centre  of  the  animal's  forehead,  directly  between  and 
a  little  above  the  eyes. 

"That's  just  where  I  aimed,"  said  Arthur,  with  some 
excitement. 

"No,  little  chap,"  said  the  stranger,  superciliously. 
"I  seen  you  shoot,  and  your  ball  must  'a-gone  clean 
over  him.  Mine's  a  slug.  No  or'nery  rifle  ball's  go- 
in'  to  kill  a  critter  like  this,"  and  he  gave  the  dead 
monster  a  touch  with  his  boot. 

"Let's  look  at  that  ball,"  said  Mont,  curiously,  as  the 
emigrant  handled  one  of  the  clumsy  slugs  which  had 
been  fitted  for  the  big  bore  of  his  gun.  Taking  it  in 
his  hand,  and  glancing  at  the  wound  in  the  head  of  the 
buffalo,  he  stooped  to  put  it  into  the  wound.  The  skull 
was  pierced  with  a  sharply  defined  hole.  The  stranger's 
slug  rested  in  the  edge  of  it  like  a  ball  in  a  cup. 


io8  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"That  ball  don't  go  into  that  hole,  stranger,"  said 
Mont.  "The  mate  of  it  never  went  in  there.  Give 
me  a  ball,  Arty."  And  Mont,  taking  one  of  Arty's 
rifle-balls,  slipped  it  in  at  the  wound;  it  dropped  in- 
side and  was  gone. 

"It's  a  clear  case,  Cap,"  said  Hi.  "You  may  as 
well  give  it  up.  That  buffalo  belongs  to  our  camp, 
and  Arty's  the  boy  that  fetched  him — you  bet  ye." 

"Well,"  said  the  stranger,  discontentedly,  "that's  no 
need  o'  jawin'  about  it.  I  allow  thar's  meat  enough 
for  all  hands.  I'll  pitch  in  and  help  dress  the  critter, 
anyhow,"  and  he  stripped  to  work. 

There  was  certainly  no  need  of  disputing  over  the 
dead  buffalo.  It  was  Arthur's  game,  however,  clearly 
enough.  He  received  the  congratulations  of  his  friends 
with  natural  elation,  but  with  due  modesty.  He  crossed 
the  creek  again  for  knives  to  help  prepare  the  buffalo 
meat  for  immediate  use.  Barnard  had  come  tearing 
back  down  the  road  at  the  sound  of  fire-arms,  and 
now  stood  waiting  with,  "What  luck?  what  luck?"  as 
Arty  waded  the  creek,  yet  unconscious  of  his  having 
been  up  to  his  waist  in  the  stream  a  few  minutes  be- 
fore. 

Arty  told  his  story  with  some  suppressed  excitement, 
but  without  any  self-glorification.  The  water  fairly 
stood  in  Barnard's  joyful  eyes  as  he  clapped  his  young 
brother  on  the  back  and  said:  "Good  for  you,  my  old 


SOME  NEW  ACQUAINTANCES  109 

pard."  You  see  Barnard  was  beginning  to  catch  the 
slang  of  the  plains. 

They  camped  right  there  and  then.  The  buffalo  was 
dressed  and  the  choice  parts  cut  off  and  cooled  in  the 
air,  for  the  sun  was  now  low  and  night  came  on.  The 
stranger's  comrades,  camped  on  the  north  side  of 
Wood  River,  came  over  and  helped  the  party  of  ama- 
teur butchers,  and  earned  their  share  of  fresh  meat, 
which  was  all  they  could  carry  away  and  take  care  of. 
This  was  a  luxury  in  the  camp.  The  emigrants  had 
had  almost  no  fresh  meat  since  leaving  the  Missouri 
River.  Small  game  was  scarce,  and  only  a  few  birds, 
shot  at  rare  intervals,  had  given  variety  to  their  daily 
fare. 

The  boys  stood  expectantly  around  the  camp-stove 
as  the  operation  of  frying  buffalo  steaks  went  on  under 
the  superintendence  of  Mont  and  Arthur.  Sniffing 
the  delicious  odor  of  the  supper  which  had  been  so  un- 
expectedly given  them,  Barnard  said:  "Obliged  to  you, 
Arty,  for  this  fresh  beef.    You  know  I  hate  bacon." 

"And  the  best  of  it  is,"  added  little  Johnny,  "there's 
enough  of  it  to  go  round." 

"Which  is  more  than  some  chaps  can  say  of  their 
pie,"  said  Barnard. 

Arty  raised  his  hot  face  from  the  frying-pan  and 
laughed. 


CHAPTER  IX 

A   MISADVENTURE 

The  next  few  days  of  the  journey  were  toilsome  and 
uncomfortable.  The  nights  were  hot,  and  our  emi- 
grants were  greatly  annoyed  with  mosquitoes,  so  that 
Hi  gave  notice  that  he  should  go  crazy  if  they  did  not 
"let  up"  on  him.  Long  rains  had  swollen  the  streams; 
the  Platte  overflowed  its  banks  in  some  places,  and  the 
bottom  lands  opposite  Fort  Kearney  were  overflowed. 
The  boys  had  depended  on  crossing  the  river  for  the 
sake  of  visiting  the  fort,  which  was  on  the  south  side, 
but  they  were  prevented  by  the  high  water.  They 
had  no  special  errand  at  the  fort,  but  as  they  had  now 
been  a  month  on  the  road,  they  thought  it  would  be 
pleasant  to  go  over  and  "see  where  folks  lived,"  as 
Barney  expressed  it.  He  and  Mont  made  the  attempt, 
but  gave  it  up  after  wading  a  long  distance  through 
the  overflow,  without  reaching  deep  water.  This  was 
a  disappointment,  and  they  pushed  on  with  a  slight 
feeling  of  loneliness.  They  all  wanted  to  see  what  a 
frontier  fort  was  like,  though  they  knew  that  it  was 
only  a  collection  of  substantial  buildings — barracks  and 
storehouses — surrounded   by   a   stockade.     There  was 


A  MISADVENTURE  iii 

something  romantic  and  adventurous  about  a  military 
post  in  the  Indian  country,  which  to  Arthur,  at  least, 
was  very  attractive.  The  next  fort  on  their  route  was 
Fort  Laramie,  and  to  this  stage  on  their  journey  they 
now  passed  on,  still  keeping  by  the  north  bank  of  the 
Platte. 

There  was  no  occasion  for  loneliness,  however,  as  the 
road  was  now  all  alive  with  teams.  It  was  the  custom 
for  emigrant  companies  to  combine  in  trains  of  several 
companies  each.  These  stopped  sometimes,  for  a  day 
or  two  at  a  time,  in  order  to  rest,  repair  the  wear  and 
tear  of  teams,  and  get  ready  for  a  fresh  start.  On 
such  occasions  the  camp  was  busy,  though  our  young 
fellows  enjoyed  the  rest  when  it  came.  It  was  tedious 
work,  marching  all  day,  camping  at  night,  packing  up 
and  beginning  another  march  next  day.  They  knew 
they  must  be  three  or  four  months  crossing  the  conti- 
nent, and  a  "lay-by"  of  two  or  three  days  was  always 
welcome;  and  nobody  thought  such  a  stoppage  was  a 
serious  delay.  After  a  few  weeks,  everybody  got  over 
all  feverish  eagerness  to  be  the  first  at  the  mines. 
Now  and  then  some  small  party  of  horsemen,  Hghtly 
equipped  and  traveling  rapidly,  pushed  by  the  body  of 
emigrants,  their  faces  eagerly  set  toward  the  land  of 
gold,  and  scarcely  taking  time  to  sleep. 

From  such  rapid  travelers  as  these  our  boys  ascer- 
tained  who  was   behind,   and   they   soon   learned   the 


112  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

names,  origin,  and  character  of  most  of  the  companies 
between  the  Sierra  Nevada  and  the  Missouri.  While 
they  were  camped  for  a  day's  rest — Sunday's  rest — 
near  Dry  Creek,  Bush  came  up  with  his  little  cow  and 
cart.  He  had  been  traveling  with  a  Wisconsin  com- 
pany, but  had  left  them  behind  when  near  Fort  Kear- 
ney and  had  pushed  on  by  himself.  Bush  was  full  of 
news.  He  had  passed  several  parties  of  whom  our 
boys  had  heard;  and  he  had  been  passed  by  several 
more,  some  of  whom  were  ahead,  and  others  of  whom 
were  again  behind.  It  was  in  this  way  that  the  in- 
telligence on  the  trail  went  back  and  forth.  Emigrants 
thus  learned  all  about  the  fords,  the  grass,  wood  and 
water,  and  the  condition  of  the  road  before  them. 
Somehow  the  gossip  of  the  great  moving  population  of 
the  plains  flowed  to  and  fro,  just  as  it  does  in  a  small 
village.  Men  sat  around  their  camp-fires  at  night,  or 
lounged  in  the  sun,  of  a  leisure  day,  and  retailed  to  each 
other  all  the  information  they  picked  up  as  they 
traveled.  Every  man  was  a  newspaper  to  the  next 
man  he  met.  There  was  no  news  from  far  countries, 
none  from  towns,  and  only  a  very  little  from  the  land 
to  which  they  were  bound.  Th'e  long  column  of  emi- 
gration that  stretched  across  the  continent  had  its 
own  world  of  news.  It  was  all  compressed  in  the 
space  that  lay  between  the  Missouri  and  the  Sierra 
Nevada.     Thousands  of  camp-fires  sparkled  at  night 


A  MISADVENTURE  113 

along  the  winding  trail  that  ran  on  and  on  across  the 
heart  of  the  continent.  Thousands  of  wagons  moved 
slowly  to  the  westward,  an  almost  unbroken  procession 
through  an  unknown  land;  by  each  fire  was  a  com- 
munity of  wanderers;  each  wagon  was  a  moving  man- 
sion carrying  its  own  family  with  its  worldly  posses- 
sions, and  laden  with  the  beginnings  of  a  new  State 
beyond  the  mountains. 

Just  now,  camped  on  a  level  greensward,  with  a 
bright  June  sun  lighting  up  the  landscape,  our  boy 
emigrants  enjoyed  their  day  of  rest  very  much.  They 
were  grouped  under  the  shelter  of  the  tent,  which  was 
caught  up  at  the  sides  to  let  in  the  air,  for  the  weather 
was  now  growing  hot. 

"'Pears  to  me,"  said  Bush,  "this  tent  is  mighty  fine, 
but  it  lets  the  sun  in.     It's  too  all-fired  white  inside." 

"Bush  likes  to  camp  under  his  go-cart,"  laughed  Hi. 
"But  I  allow  a  tent  is  uncommonly  handy  when  it 
comes  on  to  rain." 

"As  for  the  sun  shining  in  through  the  cloth,"  said 
Mont,  "I  think  I  see  a  way  to  help  that."  So  he  caught 
up  one  or  two  of  the  blankets,  which  were  opened  out 
on  the  grass  to  air,  and  flung  them  over  the  ridge-pole. 

"You  are  a  powerful  knowin'  creeter,  Mont,"  said 
Bush,  admiringly.  "A  feller'd  suppose  you  had  been 
on  the  plains  all  your  life.  And  you  a  counter-jumper 
at  that." 


114  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

Barney  remonstrated  that  Mont  was  not  a  counter- 
jumper.  "Besides,"  he  added,  "it  don't  follow  that  a 
young  fellow  don't  know  anything  beyond  his  counter 
because  he  has  spent  some  of  his  days  behind  one." 

"Jess  so,  jess  so,"  said  Bush.  "Mont  is  on  hand 
here  to  prove  just  that.  There's  fellers  as  takes  to 
rough  work  and  plains  tricks  and  doin's  as  a  cat  does 
to  cream.  Then  again  there's  fellers  as  ain't  no  more 
use  around  a  team  than  a  cow  would  be  in  a  parlor." 

Mont  listened  with  some  amusement  to  this  con- 
versation, as  he  lay  on  the  ground  looking  up  at  the 
shaded  roof  of  the  tent.  He  explained:  "You  see. 
Bush,  I  like  teaming,  roughing  it,  and  living  out  in 
the  open  air.  Would  you  like  to  tend  store,  lay 
bricks,  or  work  in  a  factory?" 

"Nary  time,"  rejoined  Bush. 

"I  don't  believe  you  would  take  to  any  such  busi- 
ness, nor  do  well  in  it,  if  you  were  put  to  it.  Do 
you? 

"No.  If  I  was  to  be  sot  to  work,  at  regular  work, 
you  know,  why,  I  should  go  right  straight  down  to 
where  flour's  fifteen  dollars  a  bar'l,  and  no  money  to 
buy  with  at  that.  Oh,  no,  I'm  gay  and  chipper  at 
trappin',  lumberin',  gettin'  out  rock,  teamin',  or  any 
of  them  light  chores;  but  come  to  put  me  to  work, 
regular  work,  I'm  just  miserable." 

"Then  there's  Arty,"  put  in  Barney.    "He's  all  for 


A  MISADVENTURE  115 

animals.  Just  see  that  steer  follow  him  round  after 
sugar." 

Tige  had  been  loitering  around  the  camp  instead  of 
keeping  with  the  cattle,  which  grazed  near  by,  and 
Arty,  having  allowed  him  to  smell  of  a  Httle  sugar 
which  he  carried  in  his  hand,  was  enticing  him  about 
the  camping-ground. 

"Dreffle  waste  of  sugar,"  commented  Tom. 

"Never  you  mind  about  the  sugar,"  said  Hiram, 
reprovingly.  ** That's  the  knowingest  critter  on  the 
plains;  and  if  Arty  has  a  mind  to  give  him  a  spoonful, 
now  and  then,  it's  all  right.  We've  got  enough  to 
carry  us  through." 

Hearing  the  debate,  Arty  approached  the  tent,  hold- 
ing out  his  hand  toward  the  docile  Tige,  who  still  fol- 
lowed him,  snuffing  the  coveted  sugar. 

"Take  care!  take  care!  don't  come  in  here!"  yelled 
Hi.  But  Arty  kept  on,  laughing  at  Tige,  who  seemed 
also  to  be  much  amused.  Arty  stepped  over  the  body 
of  Barney,  who  lounged  by  the  door,  the  steer  immedi- 
ately following  him. 

"He'll  wallop  your  tent  over,"  shouted  Bush,  but 
Tige,  still  stepping  after  his  master  as  lightly  as  a 
full-grown  steer  could  step,  kept  on  with  his  nose  close 
to  the  boy's  open  hand,  and  drawing  long  breaths  as 
he  smelled  the  sugar.  Arty  circled  about  the  interior 
of  the  little  tent,  and  over  the  prostrate  forms  of  his 


ii6  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

comrades,  who  hugged  the  ground  in  terror  lest  the 
unwieldy  beast  should  trample  on  them.  They  were 
too  much  surprised  to  move,  and  Tige  marched  after 
Arty,  turning  around  inside  the  canvas  house  as  gin- 
gerly as  if  he  had  always  lived  in  one. 

"Why,  he  is  as  graceful  as  a  kitten,  and  he  steps 
over  you  as  if  he  were  treading  among  egg-shells," 
said  Arty,  shaking  with  fun.  "See  how  carefully  he 
misses  Hi's  big  feet.  Why,  Tige  is  almost  as  spry  as 
you  are.  Hi." 

"If  Tige  knocks  down  that  pole  I'll  trounce  you 
with  it,"  said  Hi,  who  did  not  relish  the  common  camp 
joke  about  his  large  feet.  But  the  wise  little  steer 
passed  safely  out  by  the  front  of  the  tent,  having  gone 
in  at  one  side  of  the  pole  and  out  at  the  other,  without 
doing  any  damage.  He  was  rewarded  with  the  sugar 
which  he  had  pursued  into  the  presence  of  so  much 
danger,  and  he  lay  down  at  a  distance,  contemplating 
the  group  which  he  had  just  visited. 

"I  think  you  said  something  about  a  cow  in  a  parlor. 
Bush,"  said  Arty.  "What  do  you  think  of  a  steer  in 
a  tent?" 

"Well,  youngster,  between  you  and  me  and  the  post, 
I  think  the  best  place  for  me,  as  I  said  afore,  is  out  of 
doors.  It's  close,  this  living  in  a  tent;  and  when  it 
comes  to  makin'  cattle  to  hum  in  one  of  'em,  I  ain't 
there." 


A  MISADVENTURE  117 

TIge's  friendship  for  his  young  master  was  put  to 
the  test  the  very  next  day.  It  was  a  bright  Monday 
morning  when  they  reached  Dry  Creek.  But  the 
creek  was  by  no  means  dry.  Its  steep  banks  were 
shppery  with  moisture,  and  four  or  five  feet  of  water 
flowed  through  its  bed.  A  large  number  of  teams  had 
been  passing  over,  and  when  our  young  emigrants  came 
up,  there  were  several  companies  laboriously  making 
their  way  across,  or  waiting  an  opportunity  to  strike 
into  the  trail;  except  at  one  place,  a  crossing  was 
almost  impossible.  The  wagons  were  "blocked  up," 
as  the  water  was  deep  enough  in  places  to  flow  into 
the  wagon  boxes.  "Blocking  up"  was  done  by  driving 
wide  blocks  of  wood  under  the  box  or  body  of  the  wagon, 
said  box  being  loosely  fitted  into  the  bed  or  frame- 
work. Thus  raised  on  these,  the  body  of  the  wagon 
is  kept  in  place  by  the  uprights  at  the  sides,  and  is  set 
up  high  enough  to  be  drawn  over  an  ordinary  stream 
without  wetting  its  contents. 

The  descent  into  the  creek  was  no  steeper  than  the 
way  out  on  the  other  side.  It  was  hard  enough  to  get 
down  to  the  stream  without  damage.  It  would  be 
still  more  difficult  to  get  out.  Those  who  were  then 
crossing  made  a  prodigious  racket  shouting  to  their 
animals,  at  each  other,  and  generally  relieving  their 
excited  feelings  with  noise  as  they  worked  through  the 
difficulty. 


ii8  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"We  shall  have  to  double  up,  and  there's  nobody  to 
double  up  with  us,"  said  Barnard,  ruefully. 

The  boys  had  resorted  to  the  expedient  of  "doub- 
ling up,"  or  uniting  their  team  with  that  of  some 
passing  acquaintance  before  this.  The  spirit  of  good- 
fellowship  prevailed,  and  two  or  more  parties  would 
combine  and  pull  each  other's  wagons  through  by 
putting  on  each  the  horses  or  cattle  of  the  whole,  until 
the  hardest  place  was  safely  passed.  Here,  however, 
all  the  travelers  but  themselves  were  busy  with  their 
own  affairs.  There  was  nobody  ready  to  "double  up" 
with  others. 

"Howdy,  youngsters?"  said  a  languid,  discouraged- 
looking  man,  coming  around  from  behind  a  red-covered 
wagon.     "Powerful  bad  crossing  this  yere." 

"Yes,"  said  Arthur,  who  immediately  recognized 
him  as  the  man  who  could  not  make  his  fire  burn  when 
they  were  camped  near  Pape's.  Just  then  the  sallow 
woman  put  her  head  out  of  the  wagon,  and  said :  "Glad 
to  see  you.     Me  baby's  wuss." 

"She  takes  yer  for  a  doctor,  Arty,"  whispered  Hi, 
who  remembered  that  Arthur  had  tended  the  sick  baby 
while  the  mother  was  cooking  supper. 

"We  'uns  is  havin'  a  rough  time,  ye  bet  yer  life,  but 
I  allow  we'll  pull  through.  Want  to  double  up,  you 
'uns?" 

"Yes,"  replied  Mont.     "This  is  a  pretty  bad  cross- 


A  MISADVENTURE  119 

ing  and,  as  you  have  a  strong  team,  we  should  be  glad 
to  join  forces  and  go  across  together." 

"Jine?  Oh,  yes,  we'll  hitch  up  with  ye.  Things  is 
cutting  up  rough,  and  my  old  woman  she  allows  we 
ain't  goin'  through." 

**Not  going  through?" 

"Oh,  you  keep  shut,  will  ye,  ole  man?"  said  the 
woman  from  the  wagon.  "If  you  had  a  sick  baby  to 
nuss,  you  wouldn't  be  so  peart." 

"I  ain't  so  peart,"  said  the  husband,  grimly.  "But  I 
allow  we'll  double  up,  seein'  it's  you.  I  war  agoin'  to 
wait  for  Si  Beetles,  but  we'll  just  snake  your  wagon 
over,  then  we'll  come  back  for  mine." 

The  blocks  were  got  out  and  put  under  the  wagon- 
bed,  and  the  stranger's  cattle  were  hitched  on  ahead  of 
those  of  our  boys.  The  wheels  were  chained  together, 
front  and  rear,  so  that  they  could  not  turn  and  hurry 
the  wagon  down  the  steep  bank. 

"Ye'll  have  to  wade  for  it,  boys;  you'd  better 
strip,"  advised  Messer,  for  that  was  the  stranger's 
name. 

"Oh,  it's  only  a  short  distance,"  said  Mont,  measur- 
ing the  width  of  the  creek  with  his  eye,  and  observing 
the  depth  to  which  the  men  then  in  the  water  were 
wading.  "Roll  up  your  trousers,  boys,  and  we'll  try 
it  that  way." 

The  party,  except  Hi,  who  sat  in  the  forepart  of  the 


I20  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

wagon  and  drove,  rolled  up  their  trousers;  and  the 
chained  wagon,  drawn  by  four  pair  of  cattle,  pitched 
down  the  muddy  bank,  attended  on  either  side  by  the 
young  emigrants,  Bush,  and  Messer.  Slipping  and 
sliding,  they  reached  the  bed  of  the  stream  in  safety, 
unlocked  the  wheels  and  plunged  boldly  in,  though  the 
cattle  were  bewildered  by  the  cries  of  the  owners  and 
the  confusion  of  the  crowd  crossing  the  creek. 

By  dint  of  much  urging  and  some  punching  from  be- 
hind, the  wagon  was  "snaked"  up  the  opposite  bank, 
and  our  boys  drew  breath  a  few  minutes  before  taking 
hold  of  the  rest  of  their  job. 

**Laws-a-massy  me!"  cried  the  poor  woman,  as  the 
team  slid  down  the  bank.  "This  is  wuss  than  get-out. 
I'd  sooner  wade  the  branch  myself."  But,  before  she 
could  utter  any  more  complaints,  the  wagon  was  at 
the  bottom  of  the  slope  and  the  chains  taken  from  the 
wheels.  The  cattle  went  into  the  stream  with  some 
reluctance,  and  Hi,  who  was  driving,  yelled,  "Haw, 
there,  haw!"  with  great  anxiety.  But  the  beasts 
would  not  "haw."  Little  Tige  held  in  now  with  sul- 
len courage;  the  rest  of  the  team  persisted  in  pushing 
up  stream.  Arty  and  Barnard  were  on  the  "off"  or 
upper  side  of  the  team,  but  they  could  not  keep  the 
oxen  from  running  wildly  away  from  the  opposite 
bank.  The  animals  were  panic-stricken  and  angry; 
turning  short  around  they  were  likely  to  overturn  the 


A  MISADVENTURE  121 

wagon;  Arty  rushed  out  to  the  leading  yoke  and  tried 
to  head  it  off.  Tige  was  in  the  second  yoke,  resolutely 
pulling  back  his  mate,  Molly.  It  was  in  vain.  Bally, 
the  ox  just  behind  Tige,  made  a  vicious  lunge  at  Arty, 
who,  in  dodging  to  escape  the  horns  of  the  creature, 
slipped  and  fell  headlong  into  the  water,  there  about 
up  to  his  waist.  Immediately,  he  was  struggling  among 
the  cattle,  where  he  could  not  swim,  and  was  in  danger 
of  being  trampled  by  the  excited  beasts.  Hi  shouted 
with  alarm,  and,  all  clothed  as  he  was,  leaped  from  the 
wagon.  There  was  no  need.  Before  any  of  the  party 
could  reach  him,  Arty  had  scrambled  out  and  had  laid 
hold  of  Tige's  head,  that  sagacious  brute  having  stood 
perfectly  still  and  stooping  as  his  young  master  floun- 
dered under  his  belly. 

Dripping  with  muddy  water,  and  breathless,  Arty 
struggled  to  his  feet  just  as  Hi,  similarly  drenched, 
waded  up  to  him.  This  all  took  place  in  an  instant, 
and  the  cattle,  left  for  a  moment  to  themselves,  sharply 
turned  toward  the  bank  down  which  they  had  come, 
still  heading  up  the  stream.  The  wagon  toppled  on 
two  wheels,  quivered,  and  went  over  with  a  tremen- 
dous splash. 

Everybody  rushed  to  the  wreck  and  dragged  out  the 
woman  and  her  sick  baby.  Both  were  wet  through 
and  through.  The  cattle  stood  still  now.  The  water 
gurgled    merrily   through    the   overturned   wagon,    on 


122  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

which  the  owner  looked  silently  for  a  moment,  and 
then  said: 

"Just  my  ornery  luck!" 

"Luck,  man!"  said  Mont,  impatiently.  "Why  don't 
you  bear  a  hand  and  right  up  your  wagon  before  your 
stuff  is  all  spoiled?" 

"That's  whar  yer  right,  stranger,"  replied  the  poor 
fellow.  "But  this  is  the  wust  streak  yit.  It  sorter 
stalls  me." 

Help  came  from  the  various  companies  on  both  sides 
of  the  creek,  and  Messer's  wagon  was  soon  set  up  on  its 
wheels  again,  though  nearly  all  of  its  load  was  well 
soaked.  The  woman  and  her  baby  were  taken  out  on 
to  dry  land  and  comforted  by  some  women  who  were 
with  the  wagons  already  on  the  farther  side  of  the 
creek.  When  the  party  finally  struggled  up  and  out 
of  this  unfortunate  place,  they  found  that  Messer's 
wife  had  been  taken  in  and  cared  for  at  a  wagon  which, 
covered  with  striped  ticking,  stood  apart  from  the 
others,  with  the  cattle  unyoked  near  by. 

"Why,  there's  Nance!"  said  Johnny;  and,  as  he 
spoke,  that  young  woman  descended  from  the  wagon 
and  approached. 

"Ye're  wet,  young  feller,"  she  remarked  to  Arty. 

"Yes,"  he  responded,  wringing  out  his  trousers-legs 
as  well  as  he  could.  "We  were  with  the  team  that 
upset,  and  I  was  upset  first." 


A  MISADVENTURE  123 

"Jest  like  ye.  Always  in  somebody's  mess.  I'd 
lend  ye  a  gound,  but  haven't  got  but  one." 

"Thank  you  kindly.  I  don't  think  your  gowns 
would  fit  me.  But  that  yeast  of  yours  did  first-rate." 
Arthur  thought  lightly  of  his  own  troubles. 

"I  knowed  it  would.  Have  you  kept  your  risin' 
right  along?" 

"Oh  yes,  we  have  saved  leaven  from  day  to  day, 
and  so  we  have  'riz  bread,'  as  you  call  it,  every  time 
we  bake." 

"Glad  of  it.  We'll  have  to  divide  with  these  Mis- 
souri folks.  I  reckon  they've  lost  all  their  little  fixin's; 
but  then  they  use  salt  risin'.  Them  ornery  critters 
from  Pike  always  do." 

The  Missourians  were  in  bad  plight.  Whatever  was 
liable  to  damage  by  water  was  spoiled,  and  our  party 
of  emigrants  felt  obliged  to  stop  and  help  the  poor  fel- 
low unload  his  wagon,  spread  out  his  stuff  to  dry,  and 
get  himself  together  again  for  a  fresh  start.  The  sun 
shone  brightly  and  the  weather  was  favorable  to  the 
unhappy  emigrant,  who  sat  around  among  his  wet 
goods,  bewaihng  his  hard  luck,  while  his  chance  ac- 
quaintances repaired  damages  and  saved  what  they 
could  of  his  effects. 

His  wife,  loosely  clad  in  a  dress  belonging  to  Nance's 
mother, — a  large  and  jolly  woman, — fished  out  from  the 
crushed  wagon-bows,  where  it  had  been  suspended  in  a 


124  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

cotton  bag,  the  wreck  of  an  extraordinary  bonnet.  It 
was  made  of  pink  and  yellow  stuff,  and  had  been  a 
gorgeous  affair.  She  regarded  it  sadly,  and  said:  "It 
was  the  gayest  bunnit  I  ever  had." 

Nance  contemplated  the  parti-colored  relic  with 
some  admiration,  but  said: 

"Just  you  hang  that  there  up  in  the  sun  alongside  of 
that  feller,  and  they'll  both  on  'em  come  out  all  right. 
Fact  is,"  she  said,  condescending  to  approve  Arty, 
"he's  all  right,  anyhow;  and  if  that  big  chap  hadn't 
jumped  out  of  the  wagon  and  left  the  cattle  to  take 
care  of  themselves,  the  wagon  wouldn't  have  gone  over. 
So  now!" 

"But  Hi  thought  Arty  was  getting  killed,"  re- 
monstrated Johnny.  "So  he  jumped  out  into  the 
water,  head  over  heels,  when  he  saw  Arty  fall." 

"Don't  care  for  all  that,"  retorted  Nance,  with 
severity.  "Ye're  altogether  too  chipper.  If  yer  Hi 
hadn't  upset  that  wagon,  I  might  have  seen  this  yer 
bonnet  before  it  was  mashed." 

"Never  mind,"  said  Arty.  "Perhaps  Mont  will 
show  you  how  to  straighten  out  that  bonnet,  when  he 
has  finished  mending  Messer's  wagon-bows.  Mont 
knows  almost  everything." 

"Who  is  that  yer  Mont,  as  you  call  him,  anyhow?" 
asked  Nance. 

"He's  from  Boston,  is  real  smart,  and  just  about 
knows  everything,  as  I  told  you." 


A  MISADVENTURE  125 

"Oho!  and  that's  why  you  are  called  'The  Boston 
Boys,'  is  it?" 

"But  they  call  us  'The  Lee  County  Boys.'  We 
came  from  Lee  County,  Illinois." 

"Lee  County,  Illinoy!"  repeated  the  girl,  with  a 
knowing  air.  "Folks  on  the  prairie  calls  you  'The 
Boston  Boys.'     So  now!" 


CHAPTER  X 

AMONG   THE    BUFFALOES 

While  the  wagon  was  yet  heavily  loaded,  the  boys 
spared  the  oxen,  and  so  seldom  rode.  At  first,  the 
member  of  the  party  who  drove  the  team  was  permitted 
to  sit  in  the  wagon  part  of  the  time.  But  the  roads 
were  now  very  hard  for  the  cattle,  and  so  all  hands 
walked.  Old  Jim's  back  was  sore;  he  could  not  be 
saddled,  and  he  was  left  to  follow  the  team,  which  he 
did  with  great  dociUty.  The  boys  hardened  the  mus- 
cles of  their  legs,  but  they  complained  bitterly  of  sore 
feet.  Much  walking  and  poorly  made  boots  had  lamed 
them.  The  moccasins  which  they  wore  at  times  were 
more  uncomfortable  than  the  cow-hide  boots  they  had 
brought  from  home. 

"Confounded  Indians!"  complained  Tom,  "they 
don't  put  no  heels  to  their  moccasins;  they  tire  a  fel- 
low's feet  just  awful." 

"Sprinkle  some  whisky  in  your  boots;  that's  all  the 
use  the  stuff  can  be  to  us;  and  whisky  is  good  to 
toughen  your  feet."    This  was  Mont's  advice. 

"But  why  don't  the  Indians  put  heels  on  their  moc- 
casins?    That's  what  I'd  like  to  know." 

126 


AMONG  THE   BUFFALOES  127 

"Why,  Tom,  it  isn't  natural.  Those  Sioux  that  we 
saw  down  at  Buffalo  Creek  can  outrun  and  outjump 
any  white  man  you  ever  saw.  They  couldn't  do  it  if 
they  had  been  brought  up  with  heels  on  their  moc- 
casins." 

"But  for  all  that,  them  moccasins  are  powerful  weak 
in  the  sole,"  grumbled  Hi.  "  'Pears  to  me,  sometimes, 
as  if  my  feet  was  all  of  a  blister,  after  travelling  all  day 
in  the  dod-rotted  things.  Hang  Indian  shoemakers, 
anyhow!" — and  Hiram  contemplated  his  chafed  feet 
with  great  discontent. 

"Then  there's  old  Bally,"  chimed  in  Arty.  "He's 
gone  and  got  lame.     He  don't  wear  moccasins,  though." 

"But,"  said  Mont,  "we  may  be  obliged  to  put  moc- 
casins on  him — or,  at  least,  on  his  sore  foot." 

"What  for.?" 

"Well,  we've  fixed  his  foot  now  two  or  three  times, 
and  he  gets  no  better  of  his  lameness.  We  might  put 
a  leather  shoe,  like  a  moccasin,  filled  with  tar,  on  his 
foot.     That's  good  for  the  foot-rot,  or  whatever  it  is." 

"Gosh!"  said  Hi.  "How  much  that  feller  do 
know!" 

"Well,"  laughed  Mont,  "I  picked  that  up  the  other 
day.  Those  Adair  County  men  said  that  if  Bally 
didn't  get  better,  tar  would  be  healing;  and  they  said 
to  bind  it  on  with  a  shoe  made  out  of  an  old  boot- 
leg." 


128  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"Lucky  I  picked  up  those  boot-legs  you  thought  were 
of  no  use,  Barney  Crogan,"  said  Arthur.  "They'll  be 
just  the  things  for  Bally's  moccasins." 

The  boys  had  put  up  with  many  discomforts.  Some- 
times they  had  no  water  for  drinking  or  cooking,  ex- 
cept what  they  found  in  sloughs  and  swampy  places 
by  the  track.  Often  even  this  poor  supply  was  so 
mixed  with  dead  grass  and  weeds  that  it  was  neces- 
sary to  strain  it  before  using  it.  Then,  again,  in  the 
long  stretch  which  they  were  now  travelling  between 
Fort  Kearney  and  Fort  Laramie,  fuel  was  scarce.  Not 
a  tree  nor  shrub  was  in  sight;  buffalo  chips  were  sel- 
dom to  be  found,  and  the  only  stuff  from  which  a  fire 
could  be  made  was  the  dry  grass  and  grease-weed  found 
in  sterile  spots  among  the  bluffs  above  the  road.  They 
were  having  hard  times.  Along  the  valley  of  the 
Platte  heavy  rain-storms  are  frequent  in  the  summer 
time;  and,  more  than  once,  all  hands  were  obliged  to 
get  up  in  the  night  and  stand  by  the  tent,  in  a  pelting 
rain,  to  keep  it  from  blowing  away.  One  night,  in- 
deed, after  bracing  the  tent  all  around  outside  with 
extra  lines,  they  were  forced  to  stand  on  bundles  and 
boxes  inside  and  hold  up  the  ridge-pole,  which  bent 
in  the  force  of  the  gale  and  threatened  to  snap  in  twain. 
And  then  the  mosquitoes! 

But  here  was  a  serious  trouble.  Bally  was  a  surly 
animal,   but  he  was   a  powerful   fellow  and   the  best 


AMONG  THE   BUFFALOES  129 

traveller  in  the  team.  He  had  been  lame  these  four 
days,  and  was  getting  worse  instead  of  better.  The 
boys  had  passed  many  cattle,  turned  out  on  account 
of  their  lameness  by  those  who  had  gone  before.  They 
did  not  like  to  think  of  turning  out  old  Bally  to  die  by 
the  roadside.  Matters  were  not  so  serious  as  that. 
But  Mont  had  said,  almost  under  his  breath:  "If  we 
should  have  to  leave  Bally " 

Serious  remedies  were  now  to  be  tried.  The  tar- 
bucket  was  taken  out  from  under  the  wagon,  and  a  shoe 
made  from  one  of  provident  Arty's  boot-legs.  With 
the  assistance  of  Bush,  Messer,  and  one  or  two  neigh- 
bors at  the  camp,  poor  Bally  was  cast  by  suddenly 
puUing  on  ropes  attached  to  one  hind-foot  and  one  fore- 
foot. The  big  beast  fell  over  on  his  side  with  a  thump 
that  made  Arty's  heart  jump.  Then  each  person  held 
that  part  of  the  animal  to  which  he  had  previously 
been  assigned.  Nance,  whose  father  was  now  with 
them  for  a  time,  looked  on  with  profound  interest. 

The  struggling  animal  subsided,  after  a  while,  into 
an  angry  quiet,  his  eyes  rolling  wildly  at  Arty  and 
Johnny,  who  sat  on  his  head  to  keep  him  down. 

"Set  onto  him  heavy,  boys,"  said  Bush.  "  'S  long's 
he  can't  lift  you,  he  can't  Hft  his  head;  and  's  long's 
he  can't  lift  his  head,  he's  got  to  lay  still." 

But  he  did  not  lie  still.  When  the  shoe,  full  of  soft 
tar,  was  fairly  on,  but  not  tied.  Bally  wiggled  his  tail 


I30  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

very  animatedly,  cuffed  Bush  on  the  side  of  his  head 
with  the  lame  foot,  which  he  suddenly  jerked  out  of 
the  hands  of  the  operators,  and,  with  one  mighty  effort, 
threw  up  his  head,  angrily  brandishing  his  horns  the 
while.  Arthur  and  Johnny  flew  into  the  air,  one  to 
the  right  and  one  to  the  left,  as  Bally's  head  swung  in 
either  direction.  Struggling  to  his  feet,  the  worried 
beast  shuffled  off  a  few  paces,  his  shoe  half  sticking  to 
his  foot  in  slip-shod  fashion;  then  he  stopped  and  re- 
garded the  whole  party  with  profound  disfavor. 

"Wal,  I  allow  you  are  a  nice  creeter,  you  are!"  said 
Hi,  with  disgust.  **  Don't  know  yer  best  friends,  you 
don't,  when  they're  trying  to  cure  ye  up." 

"Why,  he's  as  spry  as  a  cat  and  as  strong  as  an  ox," 
cried  Bush.  "But  them  boys  is  spryer.  See  'em  go. 
Tore  yer  shirt,  didn't  it,  Arty?" 

"My  belt  saved  me,"  said  the  boy  bravely,  exhibit- 
ing a  huge  rent  in  his  flannel  shirt,  and  a  long  red 
streak  on  the  white  skin  of  his  chest,  where  Bally's 
sharp  horn  had  plunged  under  his  belt  and  sharply 
along  his  "hide,"  as  Bush  called  it.  Johnny  had  turned 
a  somersault,  lighting  on  his  shoulders,  but  without 
serious  damage. 

"Well,  we've  got  it  all  to  do  over  again,"  was  Mont's 
philosophic  comment;  and,  under  his  leadership,  Bally 
was  once  more  thrown  and  held  down  until  the  shoe 
was  firmly  fixed  on  his  foot.     He  walked  off  with  a 


AMONG  THE   BUFFALOES  131 

limp,  evidently  very  much  puzzled  with  his  first  ex- 
periment in  wearing  leather  shoes. 

"Looks  like  a  bear  in  moccasins,"  said  Hi,  grimly. 
"Leastways,  he  looks  as  I  allow  a  bear  would  look  in 
moccasins,  or  with  one  of  'em  onto  him.  Next  time 
you  are  sot  on  a  steer's  head,  Arty,  you  git  where  he 
can't  h'ist  you  higher'n  a  kite  when  he  tries  to  git  up." 

"I  sat  where  I  was  told.  Hi;  but  I  didn't  weigh 
enough.     That's  what  was  the  matter." 

Their  lame  ox  did  not  keep  his  shoe  on  more  than  a 
day  or  two  at  a  time,  and  the  boys  soon  had  the  dis- 
agreeable task  of  replacing  it  quite  often.  It  was  a 
troublesome  affair;  but  they  were  now  obliged  to  face 
the  more  troublesome  question  of  supplying  his  place, 
in  case  it  became  necessary  to  leave  him  behind. 
Bally's  mate  was  like  him — a  large  and  powerful  ox; 
Tige  and  Molly,  the  leaders,  were  lighter.  With  these 
three  and  their  horse.  Old  Jim,  they  might  go  on;  but 
the  prospect  was  gloomy. 

"Pity  we  can't  hitch  up  some  of  these  buffaloes  that 
are  running  around  loose,"  said  Barnard,  with  a  per- 
sonal sense  of  the  wastefulness  of  so  many  cattle  going 
wild,  while  they  needed  only  one  draught  animal. 
"Could  we  catch  one  of  these  critters  and  put  him  into 
the  yoke,  I  wonder?" 

"You  catch  one,  and  I  will  agree  to  yoke  him," 
laughed  Mont. 


132  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

It  was  not  surprising  that  Barney  grumbled  at  the 
waste  of  animal  power,  and  that  a  wild  notion  that 
some  of  it  ought  to  be  made  useful  crossed  his  mind. 
The  country  was  now  covered  with  vast  herds  of  buf- 
faloes, moving  to  the  north.  One  day,  Mont  and  Arty 
ascended  a  steep  bluff,  to  the  right  of  the  road,  while 
the  wagon  train  kept  slowly  on  below  them.  As  far  as 
the  eye  could  reach  northward,  the  undulating  country 
was  literally  black  with  the  slow-moving  herds.  Here 
and  there,  on  some  conspicuous  eminence,  a  solitary, 
shaggy  old  fellow  stood  relieved  against  the  sky — a 
sentinel  over  the  flowing  streams  of  dark  brown  animals 
below.  They  moved  in  battalions,  in  single  files,  by 
platoons,  and  in  disorderly  masses,  stretching  out  in 
vast  dark  patches  and  covering  the  green  earth.  Before 
them  was  grass  and  herbage;  behind  them  was  a 
trampled,  earthy  paste. 

Occasionally,  these  migratory  herds,  coming  to  a 
stream,  rushed  in  thirstily,  each  rank  crowding  hard 
upon  another.  When  the  foremost  struck  the  water, 
galloping  along  with  thundering  tread,  the  fury  of  their 
charge  sent  the  spray  high  in  the  air,  like  a  fountain. 
In  an  instant,  the  crystal  current  was  yellow  and  tur- 
bid, with  the  disturbed  soil;  then  a  dense  mass  of  black 
heads,  with  snorting  muzzles,  crowded  the  surface 
from  bank  to  bank. 

"See!    see!"  cried  Arthur.     **How  those  big  fellows 


AMONG  THE   BUFFALOES  133 

run  on  ahead,  lie  down  and  roll,  and  then  jump  up  and 
dash  on  again.  Why,  they're  spryer  than  old  Bally 
was  the  other  day,  when  he  pitched  me  sky  high." 

"Yes,  and  if  you  watch,  you  will  see  that  all  the 
buffaloes  on  the  side  of  that  bluff  drop  in  the  same 
place,  roll  and  skip  on  again,  almost  like  a  lot  of  cats." 

"Why  do  they  do  that,  Mont?" 

"Well,  you  know  that  most  hairy  animals  Hke  to  roll; 
I  suppose  it  answers  for  a  scratching-post.  If  you  ever 
come  to  a  tree  in  this  part  of  the  country,  you  will  find 
it  all  worn  smooth  and  tufted  with  loose  hair,  where 
the  buffaloes  have  rubbed  themselves  against  it." 

"But,  somehow,  these  chaps  all  seem  to  drop  in  the 
same  place  and  then  canter  on  again.  I  should  think 
each  buffalo  would  want  a  clean  spot." 

"Oh  no!  that  place  is  worn  to  the  soil  now,  and  is  a 
better  one  to  rub  the  hide  of  the  creature  in  than  a 
grassy  place  would  be.  For  years  after  this,  if  we  were 
to  come  along  here,  we  should  find  a  big  patch  right 
there  where  the  buffaloes  are  rolling  as  they  trot  along. 
The  grass  won't  grow  there  again  for  a  great  while. 
That  is  what  the  plainsmen  call  a  buffalo-wallow — 
though  a  'waller,'  I  believe,  is  the  correct  plains  ex- 
pression." 

"I  like  you,  Mont,"  said  Arty,  looking  frankly  into 
Morse's  eyes,  "because  you  know  everything." 

"Oh  no,  Arty,  not  everything.     You  are  a  partial 


134  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

friend.  I'm  only  a  greenhorn.  But  look  at  that! 
My!    But  isn't  that  a  sight?" 

As  he  spoke,  a  vast  crowd  of  aninials,  moving  from 
the  eastward,  came  surging  up  over  a  swale  in  the 
undulating  surface.  There  seemed  to  be  hundreds  of 
thousands.  The  ground  disappeared  from  sight,  and 
in  its  place,  as  if  it  had  swallowed  it,  was  a  flood  of 
dark  animal  life.  There  was  no  longer  any  individual- 
ity; it  was  a  sea.  It  didn't  gallop;  it  moved  onward 
in  one  slow-flowing  stream.  There  was  no  noise;  but 
a  confused  murmur,  like  the  rote  of  the  distant  sea 
before  a  storm,  floated  on  the  air.  There  was  no  con- 
fusion; in  one  mighty  phalanx  the  countless  creatures 
drifted  on,  up  the  hills  and  down  the  horizon. 

"Jingo!"  exclaimed  Arty.  "I  don't  wonder  Barney 
grumbles  because  there  is  so  much  cattle-power  run- 
ning to  waste.  Don't  I  wish  we  could  hitch  up  four  or 
five  yoke  of  those  old  chaps!  We'd  go  to  California 
just  'fluking,'  as  Bush  would  say." 

"If  I  had  my  way  about  it,  my  boy,  I'd  have  some 
of  that  good,  nice  buff'alo-beef  that  is  running  about 
loose  here  cut  up  and  sent  to  poor  folks  in  Boston." 

"Well,  there  are  poor  folks  in  other  cities  besides 
Boston,  Monty,  you  know." 

"To  be  sure;  only  I  think  of  them  first,  because  I 
know  them.  And  wherever  they  are,  some  of  those 
same  poor  folks  don't  get  fresh  meat  very  often.     And 


AMONG  THE   BUFFALOES  135 

here's  millions  and  millions  of  pounds  going  to  waste. 
It  seems  to  me  that  there's  a  screw  loose  somewhere 
that  this  should  be  so." 

Arthur  regarded  this  wonderful  cattle  show  with 
great  soberness  and  with  new  interest. 

"Why  can't  some  rich  man  have  these  buffaloes 
killed,  and  the  fresh  meat  sent  to  the  poor  people  who 
starve  in  cities?" 

"Perhaps  a  more  sensible  plan  would  be  to  bring 
the  poor  out  here." 

"Sure  enough,"  responded  the  lad,  "I  never  thought 
of  that.  But  if  next  year's  emigrants  kill  the  buffaloes 
like  they  do  now,  there  will  be  none  left  when  the 
settlers  come.  Why,  I  counted  twenty-seven  dead 
ones  on  the  cut-off,  yesterday,  when  Johnny  and  I  took 
that  trail  back  of  Ash  Hollow." 

"And  even  the  animals  that  are  cut  into  are  not  used 
much  for  food,"  added  Mont.  "We  have  all  the 
buffalo  meat  we  want;  and  while  you  were  off,  yester- 
day, I  passed  a  place  where  some  party  had  camped, 
and  I  saw  where  they  had  kindled  a  fire  from  an  old, 
used-up  wagon,  and  had  heaped  up  two  or  three  car- 
cases of  buffaloes  to  burn.  Great  waste  of  fuel  and 
meat,  too,  I  call  that.  But  I  greased  my  boots  by  the 
marrow  frying  out  of  the  bones." 

Mont  and  Arty  descended  the  bluff,  and  reaching  the 
rolling  plain  behind  it,  moved  to  the  north  and  west, 


136  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

keeping  the  general  course  of  the  road,  but  leaving  the 
bluff  between  it  and  them. 

"We  have  nothing  but  our  pistols  to  shoot  with," 
said  Mont,  "and  I  wouldn't  shoot  one  if  I  could.  But 
we  may  as  well  see  how  near  we  can  get  to  them." 

They  walked  rapidly  toward  the  moving  mass  of 
buffaloes.  Here  and  there  were  grazing  herds,  but 
most  of  them  seemed  to  be  slowly  travelling  without 
stopping  to  eat.  Mont  advised  that  they  should  creep 
up  a  bushy  ravine  which  led  into  a  gap  in  the  hills,  and 
was  blackened  on  its  edges  with  buffaloes.  Cautiously 
moving  up  this  depression,  they  emerged  at  the  far- 
ther end  and  found  themselves  in  a  throng  of  animals, 
just  out  of  gun-shot  range.  Some  were  standing  still, 
others  were  moving  away,  but  all  regarded  the  strangers 
with  mild  curiosity. 

"Why,  I  thought  I  should  be  afraid,"  confessed 
Arthur. 

"No,"  whispered  Mont.  "As  long  as  they  are  not 
enraged  by  a  long  chase,  or  driven  into  a  corner,  they 
are  as  harmless  as  so  many  cows." 

Passing  out  between  the  hills,  the  young  fellows  found 
themselves  on  a  nearly  level  plain.  Here,  too,  was  a 
dense  throng  of  buffaloes,  stretching  off  to  the  un- 
dulating horizon.  As  the  two  explorers  walked  on,  a 
wide  lane  seemed  to  open  in  the  mighty  herds  before 
them.     Insensibly,  and  without  any  hurry,  the  crea- 


AMONG  THE  BUFFALOES  137 

tures  drifted  away  to  the  right  and  left,  browsing  or 
staring,  but  continually  moving.  Looking  back,  they 
saw  that  the  buffaloes  had  closed  up  their  ranks  on 
the  trail  which  they  had  just  pursued;  while  before, 
and  on  either  hand,  was  a  wall  of  animals. 

"We  are  surrounded!"  almost  whispered  Arthur, 
with  some  alarm. 

"Never  mind,  my  boy.  We  can  walk  out,  just  as 
the  children  of  Israel  did  from  the  Red  Sea.  Only  we 
have  waves  of  buffaloes,  instead  of  water,  to  close  be- 
hind and  open  before  and  be  a  wall  on  each  side.   See!" 

And,  as  they  kept  on,  the  mass  before  them  melted 
away  in  some  mysterious  way,  always  at  the  same  dis- 
tance from  them. 

"See!  We  move  in  a  vacant  space  that  travels  with 
us  wherever  we  go,  Arty." 

"Yes,"  said  the  lad.  "It  seems  just  as  if  we  were  a 
candle  in  the  dark.  The  open  ground  around  us  is  the 
light  we  shed;  the  buffaloes  are  the  darkness  outside." 

"A  good  figure  of  speech,  that,  my  laddie.  I  must 
remember  it.  But  we  are  getting  out  of  the  wilder- 
ness. 

They  had  now  come  to  a  sharp  rise  of  ground,  broken 
by  a  rocky  ledge,  which  turned  the  herds  more  to  the 
northward.  Ascending  thus,  they  were  out  of  the  buf- 
faloes for  the  time,  but  beyond  them  were  thousands 
more.     Turning    southward,    they    struck    across    the 


138  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

country  for  the  road,  quite  well  satisfied  with  their  ex- 
plorations. 

Between  two  long  divides,  or  ridges,  they  came  upon 
a  single  wagon,  canvas-covered,  in  which  were  two 
small  children.  Two  little  boys  were  playing  near,  and 
four  oxen  were  grazing  by  a  spring. 

In  reply  to  Mont's  surprised  question  as  to  how  they 
came  off  the  road,  and  why  they  were  here  alone,  they 
said  that  their  father  and  uncle  had  come  up  after  the 
buffaloes,  and  were  out  with  their  guns.  Their  mother 
was  over  on  the  bluff,  a  little  rocky  mass  which  rose 
like  an  island  in  the  middle  of  the  valley.  She  had 
gone  to  hunt  for  "sarvice-berries."  They  were  left  to 
mind  the  cattle  and  the  children. 

"Pretty  careless  business,  I  should  say,"  murmured 
Mont.  "Well,  youngsters,"  he  added,  "keep  by  the 
wagon;  and  if  your  cattle  stray  off,  they  may  get 
carried  away  by  the  buffaloes.     Mind  that!" 

They  went  on  down  the  valley,  looking  behind  them 
at  the  helpless  little  family  alone  in  the  wilderness. 

"A  man  ought  to  be  whipped  for  leaving  his  young 
ones  here  in  such  a  lonely  place,"  said  Mont. 

Suddenly,  over  the  southern  wall  of  the  valley,  like 
a  thunder-cloud,  rose  a  vast  and  fleeing  herd  of  buffaloes. 
They  were  not  only  running,  they  were  rushing  like  a 
mighty  flood. 

*'A  stampede!    a  stampede!"  cried  Mont;  and  fly- 


AMONG  THE   BUFFALOES  139 

ing  back  to  the  unconscious  group  of  children,  followed 
by  Arthur,  he  said:  "Run  for  your  lives,  youngsters! 
Make  for  the  bluff!" 

Seizing  one  of  the  little  ones,  and  bidding  Arthur 
take  the  other,  he  started  the  boys  ahead  for  the  island- 
blufF,  which  was  some  way  down  the  valley.  There 
was  not  a  moment  to  lose.  Behind  them,  like  a  rising 
tide,  flowed  the  buffaloes  in  surges.  A  confused  mur- 
mur filled  the  air;  the  ground  resounded  with  the  hur- 
ried beat  of  countless  hoofs,  and  the  earth  seemed  to 
be  disappearing  in  the  advancing  torrent.  Close  be- 
hind the  flying  fugitives,  the  angry,  panic-stricken 
herd  tumbled  and  tossed.  Its  labored  breathing 
sighed  like  a  breeze,  and  the  warmth  of  its  pulsations 
seemed  to  stifle  the  air. 

"To  the  left!  to  the  left!"  screamed  Arthur,  seeing 
the  bewildered  boys,  who  fled  like  deer,  making  di- 
rectly for  the  steepest  part  of  the  bluff.  Thus  warned, 
the  lads  bounded  up  the  little  island,  grasping  the  un- 
derbrush as  they  climbed.  Hard  behind  them  came 
Arty,  pale,  his  features  drawn  and  rigid,  and  bearing 
in  his  arms  a  little  girl.  Mont  brought  up  the  rear 
with  a  stout  boy  on  his  shoulder,  and  breathless  with 
excitement  and  the  laborious  run. 

Up  the  steep  side  they  scrambled,  falling  and  re- 
covering themselves,  but  up  at  last.  Secure  on  the 
rock,  they  saw  a  heaving  tide  of  wild  creatures  pour 


I40  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

tumultuously  over  the  edge  of  the  ridge  and  fill  the 
valley.  It  leaped  from  ledge  to  ledge,  tumbled  and 
broke,  rallied  again  and  swept  on,  black  and  silent  save 
for  the  rumbling  thunder  of  countless  hoofs  and  the 
panting  breath  of  the  innumerable  multitude.  On  it 
rolled  over  every  obstacle.  The  wagon  disappeared 
in  a  twinkling,  its  white  cover  going  down  in  the  black 
tide  like  a  sinking  ship  at  sea.  Past  the  island-like 
bluff,  where  a  little  group  stood  spellbound,  the  herd 
swept,  the  rushing  tide  separating  at  the  rocky  point, 
against  which  it  beat  and  parted  to  the  right  and  left. 
Looking  down,  they  saw  the  stream  flow  by,  on  and  up 
the  valley.  It  was  gone,  and  the  green  turf  was  brown 
where  it  had  been.  The  spring  was  choked,  and  the 
wagon  was  trampled  flat. 

Fascinated  by  the  sight,  Mont  and  Arthur  never 
took  their  eyes  from  it  until  it  was  over.  Then  re- 
turning to  their  young  charges,  they  saw  a  tall,  gaunt 
woman,  with  a  horror-stricken  face,  gathering  the 
whole  group  in  her  arms.     It  was  the  mother. 

"I  don't  know  who  you  be,  young  men,  but  I  thank 
you  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart,"  she  said.  "Yes,  I 
thank  you  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart — and,  oh!  I 
thank  God,  too!"    And  she  burst  into  tears. 

Arthur,  at  loss  for  anything  else  to  say,  remarked: 
**Your  wagon  is  all  smashed." 

"I  don't  care— don't  care,"  said  the  woman,  hys- 


BEHIND  THEM,    LIKE  A   RISING  TIDE,    FLOWED   THE   BUFFALOES   IN    SURGES 


AMONG  THE   BUFFALOES  141 

terically  rocking  herself  to  and  fro  where  she  sat  with 
her  children  clasped  to  her  bosom.  "So's  the  young 
ones  are  safe,  the  rest  may  go  to  wrack." 

As  she  spoke,  a  couple  of  horsemen,  carrying  rifles, 
came  madly  galloping  down  the  valley,  far  in  the  wake 
of  the  flying  herd.  They  paused  thunderstruck,  at 
the  fragments  of  their  wagon  trampled  in  the  torn  soil. 
Then,  seeing  the  group  on  the  rock,  they  hastened  on, 
dismounted,  and  climbed  the  little  eminence. 

"Great  powers  above,  Jemimy!  we  stampeded  the 
buffaloes !"  said  the  elder  of  the  pair  of  hunters. 

Arty  expected  to  hear  her  say  that  she  was  thankful 
so  long  as  they  were  all  alive. 

"Yes,  and  a  nice  mess  you've  made  of  it."  This  was 
all  her  comment. 

"Whar's  the  cattle,  Zeph?"  asked  the  father  of  this 
flock. 

"Gone  off  with  the  buffaloes,  I  reckon,  dad,"  was 
the  response  of  his  son  Zephaniah. 

The  man  looked  up  and  down  the  valley  with  a  be- 
wildered air.  His  wagon  had  been  mashed  and  crushed 
into  the  .  .^and.  His  cattle  were  swept  out  into  space 
by  the  resistless  flood,  and  were  nowhere  in  sight.  He 
found  words  at  last: 

"Well,  this  is  perfeckly  rediclus." 


CHAPTER  XI 

IN  WHICH  THE   BOSTON  BOYS   LOSE  AN  OLD  FRIEND  AND 
FIND   A    NEW    FRIEND 

**We  are  from  Cedar  Rapids,  Iowa,"  was  the  answer 
of  the  buffalo-ruined  emigrant,  when  Mont  asked  him 
about  his  company.  "The  way  we  came  to  be  here 
was  this:  My  brother  Jake  here  and  I  wanted  to  hunt 
buffaloes,  so  we  left  the  train  back  at  Crab  Creek, 
and  just  scouted  on  ahead  to  get  a  crack  at  the  buffaloes. 
She  wanted  to  come,  and  as  she  wouldn't  leave  the 
children,  we  all  bundled  into  the  wagon  and  allowed  to 
stay  here  a  couple  of  days  before  the  rest  of  the  train 
came  along." 

"How  many  teams  are  there  in  your  train?"  asked 
Mont. 

"Twenty-five  teams,  ten  horses,  and  a  hundred  and 
seventy-five  head  of  cattle." 

"Oh,  well,"  said  Mont,  "you  will  get  along  all  right." 

"I  ain't  so  sure  of  that,  stranger.  The  train's  get- 
ting short  of  grub  already;  and  if  we  are  able  to  get  to 
Salt  Lake  without  being  on  allowance,  we'll  be  lucky." 

"Well,  ole  man,"  put  in  the  wife,  "you've  lost  your 

wagon  and  all  yer  fixin's.    How'll  ye  get  to  go  back  to 

142 


LOSING  AND  GAINING   FRIENDS      143 

the  road?  Here's  these  young  ones  to  be  taken  back 
somehow." 

One  of  the  men  stayed  to  look  for  the  missing  oxen, 
which  he  never  found;  and  the  other,  assisted  by  Mont 
and  Arthur,  made  his  way  to  the  emigrant  track  with 
the  children.  They  remained  with  our  boys  until  night, 
when  the  well-known  Cedar  Rapids  train,  to  which 
they  belonged,  came  up  and  received  their  unlucky 
comrades. 

The  country  at  this  point  grew  more  broken  and 
woody,  and,  for  some  reason,  the  emigrant  trains  be- 
came more  numerous.  Feed  for  the  cattle  was  not 
always  to  be  had,  because  there  were  so  many  animals 
to  be  pastured  on  the  short,  bunchy  buffalo  grass  of  the 
region.  Each  separate  party  drove  its  oxen  out  among 
the  hills  when  the  camps  were  pitched;  but  it  was 
necessary  to  watch  them  at  night,  and  for  this  purpose 
many  companies  combined,  and  so  divided  their  bur- 
dens by  standing  "watch  and  watch"  with  each  other. 

Mont  was  anxious  about  poor  old  Bally.  His  foot 
grew  continually  worse,  and  it  seemed  cruel  to  drive 
him  in  the  team,  but  there  was  no  help  for  it.  They 
must  get  on  somehow,  and  Bally,  lame  though  he  was, 
could  not  be  spared  from  the  yoke. 

"If  we  only  had  money  enough  now,"  said  Arty,  "we 
could  buy  a  steer  from  some  of  these  droves.  There 
are  cattle  enough  and  to  spare." 


144  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"But  not  money  enough  and  to  spare,"  responded 
Hi  gloomily.  "If  Bally  don't  get  shut  of  his  lameness, 
we  shall  have  to  leave  him.  And  I  don't  see  no  way  of 
goin'  through  with  one  yoke  of  oxen  and  a  cow  and 
one  old  hoss." 

This  was  the  first  time  the  subject  had  been  openly 
discussed  with  such  a  despondent  conclusion.  But 
each  one  of  the  party  had  thought  it  over  by  himself. 
There  was  silence  in  the  camp.  Every  day  they  passed 
cattle  and  horses  left  by  their  owners  because  they  were 
unfit  to  travel.  Their  dead  bodies  were  common  by 
the  way.  But  these  were  usually  animals  from  large 
trains,  or  from  the  teams  of  parties  too  weak  to  get 
along  alone,  and  had  joined  forces  with  others.  What 
could  they  do?  asked  Arthur  to  himself.  Then  he 
said,  almost  in  a  whisper: 

"If  we  have  to  leave  Bally,  what  shall  we  do  next, 
Hi?" 

Hi  had  no  answer.     But  Mont  said,  decidedly: 

"I  shall  go  on,  if  I  have  to  walk  or  take  passage  in 
Bush's  go-cart!" 

"I  just  b'Heve  you'd  do  it,  Mont,"  said  Hi,  with  ad- 
miration. "If  the  wust  comes  to  the  wust,  we  can 
lighten  our  load  and  hitch  up  Jim  ahead  of  Tige  and 
Bally's  mate,  and  try  that." 

"Lighten  our  load?"  asked  Tom.  "How's  that? 
We've  thrown  out  all  the  loose  truck  we  could  spare." 


LOSING  AND  GAINING  FRIENDS      145 

"Tommy,  my  boy,"  said  Hi,  with  great  solemnity, 
"there's  heaps  of  fellers,  this  very  minute,  a-goin'  on 
to  Californy  and  livin'  only  on  half-rations,  for  the 
sake  of  gettin'  through.  I  seen  a  man  back  at  Buffalo 
Creek  who  allowed  that  he  hadn't  had  a  square  meal 
since  he  left  the  Bluffs,  except  when  he  had  buffalo- 
meat,  and  that  is  not  to  be  got  only  now.  Bumbye 
it'll  be  out  of  reach." 

"So  you  mean  to  chuck  out  the  flour  and  bacon,  do 
ye?"  said  Tom,  with  great  disgust. 

"That's  about  it,  sonny." 

"Then  I'll  go  back  with  the  first  feller  we  meet 
bound  for  the  States." 

The  others  agreed  that  they  would  stay  by  each 
other  and  get  through  somehow.  Even  little  Johnny 
was  appalled  at  the  bare  idea  of  turning  back.  There 
was  nothing  for  him  behind;  his  world  was  all  before 
him;  his  friends  were  all  here  with  him. 

But  no  such  necessity  overtook  them. 

They  had  looked  forward  with  curiosity  to  Chim- 
ney Rock,  a  singular  pillar  of  stone,  standing  like  a 
round  chimney  on  a  cone-shaped  mass  of  rock,  on 
the  south  bank  of  the  Platte.  This  natural  land- 
mark, several  hundred  feet  high,  is  seen  long  before  it 
can  be  reached  by  the  emigrants  toiling  along  the 
wagon-track  by  the  river.  The  boys  had  sighted  its 
tall  spire  from  afar,  and  when  they  camped  opposite 


146  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

It,  one  night,  they  felt  as  if  they  had  really  got  into 
the  heart  of  the  continent.  They  had  long  ago  heard 
of  this  wonderful  rock,  and  its  strange  shape,  appar- 
ently sculptured  by  some  giant  architect,  towered 
before  their  eyes  at  last. 

"I  reckon  that  there  rock  must  have  been  pushed  up 
by  a  volcano,"  said  a  tall  stranger,  joining  the  boys  as 
they  were  wondering  at  Chimney  Rock,  after  having 
camped. 

"  Perhaps  the  soft  rock  and  soil  which  once  lay  around 
it  have  been  cut  away  by  the  rains  and  winds,"  said 
Barney,  diffidently.  "You  see  the  bluffs  near  by  are 
still  wasting  away  from  the  same  cause." 

"Like  enough,  like  enough.  But  what's  the  matter 
with  that  critter  of  your'n?  'Pears  like  he  was  gone 
lame. 

Hi  explained  the  difficulty,  and  told  their  visitor 
that  they  were  travelling  slowly  for  the  purpose  of 
making  the  trip  as  easy  as  possible  for  poor  Bally. 

"What!   you  don't  drive  that  beast,  do  ye?" 

"We  have  to.  We  have  only  two  yoke  of  cattle, 
counting  him." 

"Well,  he'll  never  get  well  in  the  team.  Take  him 
out  and  let  him  crawl  on  by  himself,  and  mebbe  he'll 
mend.  I've  got  one  hundred  and  fifty  or  sixty  head 
over  there" — and  the  stranger  pointed  to  his  camp  on 
the  other  side  of  the  road. 


LOSING  AND  GAINING  FRIENDS      147 

There  were  three  wagons;  two  of  them  were  im- 
mense square-topped  affairs,  with  openings  at  the  side, 
like  a  stage-coach  door.  The  people  lived  in  these 
wagons  and  slept  in  them  at  night,  having  several 
feather  beds  packed  away  in  their  depths.  One  team 
was  made  up  wholly  of  bulls,  of  which  there  were  four 
yoke.  Just  now,  the  cattle  were  at  rest,  and  two  hired 
men  were  herding  them,  while  the  women,  of  whom 
there  were  several,  prepared  supper. 

"My  name's  Rose,"  the  stranger  said,  when  his 
offer  of  assistance  had  been  gladly  accepted.  **They 
call  us  'The  Roses'  along  the  road.  I  have  my  mother, 
father,  and  sister  along  with  me;  then  there's  Scoofey 
and  his  wife  and  baby;  and  Al  and  Aaron,  they're 
workin'  their  passage  through." 

"What  part  of  the  country  are  you  from?"  asked 
Hi. 

"Sangamon  County,  Illinoy,"  replied  Rose.  "I've 
heerd  tell  of  you  boys.  'The  Boston  Boys'  they  call 
you  on  the  trail,  don't  they?" 

"No,  we  are  the  Lee  County  boys,"  said  Mont, 
smiling. 

"But,"  exclaimed  Arthur,  "we  are  called  'The 
Boston  Boys'  too;  I've  often  heard  that  name,  lately. 
Mont  here  is  from  Boston,  Captain  Rose." 

"It  don't  make  no  difference  how  you  are  called, 
boys,  and  I  allow  we'll  get  along  together  for  a  spell. 


148  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

We're  travelling  the  same  road,  and  as  long  as  we  are, 
you're  welcome  to  the  use  of  one  of  my  steers.  I  al- 
low that  you'll  be  wilHng  to  take  hold  and  help  us 
drive  the  herd  now  and  then?" 

The  boys  willingly  consented  to  this  arrangement, 
and  poor  Bally,  next  morning,  was  taken  out  of  the 
yoke  and  allowed  to  go  free  in  the  drove  of  the  Roses. 
But  the  relief  came  too  late.  Each  day  the  ox  travelled 
with  more  difficulty.  Every  morning,  before  start- 
ing, and  every  noon,  when  stopping  for  the  usual  rest, 
Bally  was  thrown  down  and  his  foot  re-shod  and 
cleansed.  It  was  of  no  avail.  Barney  took  him  out 
of  the  herd  and  drove  him  alone,  ahead  of  the  rest. 
But  it  was  agony  for  the  poor  creature;  he  could  barely 
limp  along. 

In  a  day  or  two  the  train,  now  quite  a  large  one, 
reached  Ancient  Ruins  Bluffs,  a  wonderful  mass  of 
rock,  resembling  towers,  walls,  palaces,  and  domes, 
worn  by  time  and  crumbling  to  decay.  Here  the 
road  became  rough  and  stony,  and  the  way  by  the 
side  of  the  beaten  track  was  hard  for  the  lame  ox. 
Barney  and  Arthur  clung  affectionately  to  Bally. 
He  was  an  old  friend,  and,  notwithstanding  his  vi- 
cious manner  of  using  his  horns,  they  did  not  like  to 
leave  him.  Reluctantly,  they  gave  him  up  here. 
They  must  go  on  without  him,  after  all. 

When  they  moved  out  of  camp  in  the  morning,  Bally, 


LOSING  AND  GAINING   FRIENDS      149 

who  had  been  lying  down  watching  the  preparations 
for  the  day's  march,  got  on  his  feet  with  difficulty,  as 
if  ready  to  go  on. 

"Never  mind,  old  fellow,"  said  Mont.  "You 
needn't  bother  yourself.  We  will  leave  you  here  to 
feed  by  yourself  and  get  well,  if  you  can." 

"Good-by,  Bally,"  said  Arthur,  with  a  little  pang, 
as  they  moved  off.  The  creature  stopped  chewing  his 
cud  and  looked  after  his  comrades  with  a  wild  sur- 
prise in  his  big  brown  eyes.  He  stood  on  a  little  knoll, 
regarding  the  whole  proceeding  as  if  it  were  an  entirely 
novel  turn  of  affairs. 

"Good-by,  Bally,"  again  said  Arty,  this  time  with  a 
queer,  choking  sensation  in  his  throat.  Hi  actually 
snuffled  in  his  big  bandanna  handkerchief.  Tom,  by 
way  of  changing  the  subject,  walked  by  Tige's  head, 
and,  looking  into  the  eyes  of  that  intelligent  animal, 
said: 

"Well!  if  there  ain't  a  tear  on  Tige's  nose!  He's 
sorry  to  get  shut  of  Bally,  after  all!" 

"Oh,  you  talk  too  much,"  said  Barney,  testily. 

So  they  left  Bally  looking  after  them  as  they  cHmbed 
the  ridge  and  disappeared  behind  Ancient  Ruins  Bluffs. 

That  very  night,  as  if  to  supply  the  place  of  their 
lost  friend,  a  new  acquaintance  came  to  their  camp. 
It  was  a  large  mongrel  dog,  yellow  as  to  color,  com- 
pactly  built,   and   with   a   fox-like   head.     Dogs  were 


ISO  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

not  common  on  the  plains.  This  waif  had  been  run- 
ning along  the  road  alone  for  some  days  past.  The 
boys  had  often  seen  him,  and  had  supposed  that  he 
belonged  to  some  train  behind  them.  His  feet  were 
sore  with  travel,  and  he  was  evidently  masterless. 

"Poor  fellow!"  said  Mont,  pityingly.  "Give  me  the 
arnica  out  of  the  medicine-chest,  and  I  will  fix  some 
buckskin  socks  on  his  feet." 

The  dog  accepted  these  kind  attentions,  and,  as  soon 
as  he  was  let  loose  again,  sat  down  and  deliberately 
tore  off  his  moccasins  with  his  teeth.  While  he  was 
licking  his  sore  feet,  Johnny,  who  had  been  out  with 
Tom,  gathering  fuel  on  the  bluffs,  came  in  with  a  load 
on  his  back.  He  dropped  his  burden  with  an  air  of 
astonishment,  and  exclaimed: 

"Bill  Bunce's  dog!" 

"Sho!"  said  Hi.     "What's  his  name?" 

"Pete,"  replied  the  boy,  who  could  hardly  believe 
his  eyes. 

"Well,  Pete,"  said  Hi,  "where's  yer  master?  'Cordin' 
to  all  accounts  he's  a  bad  egg.  Pity  that  there  dog 
can't  talk." 

But  Pete  had  nothing  to  say.  He  shyly  accepted 
Arthur's  proffers  of  friendship,  and  from  that  moment 
became  a  regular  member  of  the  company. 

"We've  got  such  a  lot  of  grub,  I  s'pose,  we  must 
needs  take  in  a  yaller  dog  to  divide  with,"  privately 


LOSING  AND  GAINING  FRIENDS      151 

grumbled  Tom  to  his  brother  that  night.  "Reckon 
Arthur'll  want  to  pick  up  a  jackass  rabbit  for  a  pet, 
next  thing  you  know." 

"If  you  don't  like  it,  sonny,  you  can  go  back,  you 
know,"  replied  Hi,  who  was  cross  and  sleepy.  Pete's 
position  in  the  camp  was  assured. 

A  few  days  after  this,  while  near  Fort  Laramie,  they 
had  a  chance  to  dispose  of  their  new  friend.  Just  as 
they  were  camping,  a  party  of  mounted  Indians,  of 
the  Brule  Sioux  band,  came  galloping  up  to  their  tent. 
They  were  splendid  fellows,  dressed  in  the  fullest  and 
gayest  costume  of  the  Indian  dandy.  Their  hair  was 
loosely  knotted  behind  and  stuck  full  of  brilliantly 
dyed  feathers,  which  hung  down  their  backs.  Their 
buckskin  leggings,  moccasins,  and  hunting-frocks  were 
covered  with  embroidery  in  colored  quills,  the  handi- 
work of  their  squaws.  Bright  red  blankets  dangled 
down  from  their  shoulders,  and  about  their  necks 
were  hung  strings  of  shells,  beads,  and  bears'  claws, 
with  rude  silver  ornaments.  Their  faces  were  painted 
with  red  and  yellow  ochre,  and  one  of  them,  the  chief, 
wore  a  tortoise-shell  plate  over  his  decorated  forehead, 
like  the  visor  of  a  cap. 

These  gorgeous  visitors  sat  stately  on  their  horses, 
and  regarded  our  young  emigrants  with  an  air  of  lofty 
disdain. 

"How!"    said    Mont,   who   had    been   taught   good 


152  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

manners,  if  the  Sioux  had  not.  The  chief  grunted, 
"Ugh!"  in  reply  to  this  customary  salutation.  Then 
he  happened  to  see  Pete. 

*'You  sell  him?"  pointing  to  the  dog. 

"No,  no,"  said  Arthur,  in  a  whisper.  "Don't  sell 
him,  Mont.     He  wants  to  eat  him,  probably." 

"No  sell  him,"  promptly  repHed  Mont.  "Good  dog. 
We  keep  him." 

Thus  rebuffed,  the  Indians  unbent  somewhat  from 
their  dignity,  and  the  chief,  carefully  extracting  from 
a  bead-worked  pouch  a  bit  of  paper,  handed  it  to  Bar- 
nard with  the  remark,  "You  read  um." 

The  paper  proved  to  be  a  certificate  from  Indian 
Agent  Thomans  that  the  bearer  was  a  peaceable  In- 
dian, "Big  Partisan"  by  name,  and  that  he  and  his 
band  were  not  to  be  molested  by  white  people  whom 
they  met.  These  dusky  visitors,  thus  introduced,  dis- 
mounted and  stalked  through  the  camp,  saying  noth- 
ing, but  looking  at  everything  with  stolid  gravity. 
While  the  rest  were  trying  to  make  some  conversation 
with  the  Indians,  Arty  climbed  into  the  wagon  to  get 
out  some  provisions.  While  opening  a  flour-sack  he 
saw  the  Hd  of  the  "feed-box,"  at  the  rear  end  of  the 
wagon,  in  which  were  kept  their  small  stores,  cups  and 
plates,  raised  from  the  outside  by  an  unseen  hand. 
Wondering  at  this,  the  boy  softly  worked  his  way 
toward  the  box,   concealed   by  the  raised  cover.     A 


LOSING  AND  GAINING  FRIENDS      153 

crest  of  plumes  now  nodded  above  the  lid,  and  a  soft 
rattle  showed  that  some  one  was  fingering  the  con- 
tents of  the  box.  Placing  both  hands  on  the  cover, 
which  sloped  toward  him,  Arty  gave  a  sudden  push 
and  brought  it  down  with  a  tremendous  clatter.  A 
superb-looking  Indian  stood  revealed,  having  barely 
snatched  his  hands  away  as  the  box-cover  slammed 
down. 

"How!"  he  said,  not  in  the  least  abashed.  Then, 
raising  the  lid  again  and  curiously  examining  the 
hinges,  as  if  admiring  their  mechanism,  he  said:  "Heap 
good!    White  man  know  everything." 

"The  white  man  knows  too  much  to  let  you  hook 
things  out  of  his  grub-box,"  said  Arty,  angrily. 

The  Indian  smiled  in  the  blandest  manner,  and  joined 
his  companions.  The  party  stayed  about  the  camp 
some  time,  as  if  waiting  an  invitation  to  sup  with  the 
white  men.  But  entertainment  for  Indians  was  out 
of  the  question;  there  was  not  provision  enough  to 
spare  any  for  visitors. 

When  they  went  away,  Arty  said,  grumblingly,  as  he 
went  on  with  his  preparations  for  supper: 

"Now  I  suppose  I  can  turn  my  back  on  the  wagon 
without  something  being  stolen." 

"Pooh!  Arty  thinks  he  is  the  only  one  who  keeps 
watch,"  sneered  Tom. 

"If  it  hadn't  been  for  me  that  big  dandy  Indian 


154  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

would  have  carried  off  everything  in  the  grub -box," 
returned  the  boy,  who  was  cross,  tired,  and  generally 
out  of  sorts.  He  was  making  a  buffalo  stew  for  supper 
and  Barnard,  coming  up,  looked  into  the  camp-kettle. 

"What!  no  potatoes?"  he  said,  with  a  tone  of  dis- 
gust. 

"No,"  replied  Arthur,  sharply.  "No  potatoes. 
We've  only  a  precious  few  left.  We've  got  to  make 
the  most  of  them." 

"I  wouldn't  give  a  cent  for  a  stew  without  po- 
tatoes," remonstrated  Barnard. 

"Nor  I  neither,"  joined  in  Tom,  only  too  glad  to 
see  a  little  unpleasantness  between  the  two  brothers. 

"Well,  you'll  have  to  eat  a  good  many  things  that 
you  don't  like  before  we  get  through — 'specially  if  I 
have  to  do  the  cooking.  Barney  Crogan  thinks  too 
much  of  what  he  eats,  anyhow."  This  last  shot  Arty 
fired  at  his  brother  as  Barney  moved  away  without  a 
word. 

On  the  plains,  where  men  are  by  themselves,  little 
things  like  this  sometimes  seem  to  be  very  important. 
Men  have  quarrelled  and  fought  like  wild  animals  with 
each  other  over  a  dispute  about  flapjacks.  Two  old 
friends,  on  the  emigrant  trail,  fought  each  other  with 
knives  because  one  had  twitted  the  other  with  riding 
too  often  in  the  wagon. 

Arthur  went  on  with  his  cooking,  feeling  very  un- 


LOSING  AND  GAINING  FRIENDS      155 

uOmfortable,  as  well  as  cross.  They  had  had  a  weary 
day's  drive,  and  all  hands  were  fagged. 

"The  worst  of  it  is,  I  have  to  work  around  this 
plaguey  camp-stove,  while  the  others  can  lop  down  and 
rest,"  grumbled  poor  Arty  to  himself,  as  he  became 
more  and  more  heated. 

Running  to  the  wagon  for  a  spoon,  after  a  while, 
Arty  stooped  and  looked  into  the  tent,  where  the  bundles 
of  blankets  had  been  tumbled  on  the  ground  and 
left.  Barney  was  lying  on  the  heap,  fast  asleep,  and 
with  a  tired,  unhappy  look  on  his  handsome  face. 
Arty  paused  and  gazed,  with  a  troubled  feeling,  at  his 
brother  lying  there  so  unconscious  and  still.  Barney 
had  been  sick,  and  the  night  before  he  had  started  up 
in  his  sleep  crying  "Mother!"  much  to  Arty's  alarm. 

The  boy  regarded  his  brother  for  an  instant  with 
pity,  as  his  uneasy  sleeping  attitude  recalled  home  and 
home  comforts.  Then  he  went  silently  to  the  wagon, 
took  out  six  of  their  slender  stock  of  potatoes,  pared 
and  sliced  them,  and  put  them  into  the  stew  now  bub- 
bling in  the  camp-kettle.  Nobody  but  Hi  noticed  this; 
and  he  only  grinned,  and  said  to  himself,  "Good  boy!" 

Afterward,  when  they  had  squatted  about  their  rude 
supper-table,  Barnard  uncovered  the  pan  containing 
the  stew  with  an  air  of  discontent.  Glancing  at  Arty, 
with  pleased  surprise,  he  said: 

"Why,  you  put  in  potatoes,  after  all!" 


156  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

Arthur's  cheeks  reddened,  as  he  said,  as  if  by  way 
of  apology: 

"Mont  Hkes  them,  you  know." 

Mont  laughed;  and  so  did  they  all.  After  that,  there 
was  good  humor  in  the  camp. 


CHAPTER  XII 

IN  THE   HEART   OF  THE    CONTINENT 

Fort  Laramie  was  not  a  very  interesting  place  to 
the  boys.  It  hardly  repaid  them  for  the  trouble  they 
had  in  crossing  the  river  to  get  to  it.  But  here  they 
found  a  store  kept  by  an  army  sutler,  and  Mont  said 
that  he  should  really  enjoy  buying  something,  by  way 
of  proving  to  himself  that  he  was  in  a  spot  where 
something  besides  Indian  manufactures  were  for  sale. 
Arty  looked  longingly  on  some  dry,  powdery  figs  and 
ancient  candy  which  were  among  the  sutler's  stock  in 
trade;  but  he  compromised  with  himself  and  bought 
five  cents'  worth  of  aged  raisins,  which  he  generously 
divided  with  his  comrades,  Tom  and  Johnny. 

They  all  very  much  admired  the  nicely  dressed  of- 
ficers, who  wore  as  fine  uniforms,  and  "put  on  as  many 
airs"  (as  Bush  said)  as  if  they  lived  among  white  folks. 
Then  there  were  houses — real  houses — finished  with 
siding  and  painted  white,  and  with  stone  chimneys. 
Some  of  these  were  used  as  officers'  quarters,  and  some 
were  barracks  for  the  soldiers.    These  they  examined 

157 


158  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

with  curious  interest.  They  had  seen  no  houses  for 
several  weeks.  This  was  a  Uttle  village  in  the  wilder- 
ness. 

At  the  crossing  of  the  South  Platte,  a  few  days 
after,  the  young  emigrants  found  another  trading-post. 
It  was  in  a  rude  log  hut  on  the  bank  of  the  stream; 
and  a  very  queer  stock  of  goods  was  crowded  into  it. 
There  were  pipes,  mining  tools,  playing-cards,  flour, 
bacon,  sugar,  boots  and  shoes,  and  even  buttons, 
thread,  and  needles.  But  the  prices!  They  were  tre- 
mendous. Flour  was  twenty-five  cents  a  pound; 
pipes  were  a  dollar  each;  and  a  little  glass  tumbler  of 
jam,  which  Tom  very  much  hankered  after,  was  two 
dollars  and  a  half.  Here,  too,  was  a  sort  of  news  ex- 
change; there  were  no  newspapers,  to  be  sure,  except 
one  well-worn  paper  from  St.  Louis,  now  more  than 
two  months  old,  carefully  hung  over  a  long  string  of 
buckskin,  and  not  permitted  to  be  handled  by  any- 
body. But  the  rough-bearded,  uncouth  men  who 
lounged  about  the  place  picked  up  from  the  trader 
and  half-breed  assistant  such  points  of  information  as 
had  been  left  by  those  who  had  gone  on  ahead.  They 
also  left  here  messages  for  friends  and  acquaintances 
who  were  yet  behind. 

On  the  walls  of  this  store  in  the  waste  of  the  conti- 
nent were  stuck  bits  of  paper  containing  rude  direc- 
tions   for    emigrants.     These    were    written    by    men 


IN  THE  HEART  OF  THE  CONTINENT  159 

who  had  gone  on  ahead  and  had  sent  back  some  re- 
port of  their  experience.     For  instance,  one  scrap  was : 

35  miles  from  this  post  to  Hoss  Crik.  Dont  stop  at  Wilier 
springs  which  it  is  no  springs  and  feed  mighty  pore. 

Right  under  this  was  another  bulletin,  which  read : 

Nigh  60  miles  to  Sweetwater — powerful  bad  road  till  you  get 
to  Independence  Rock — blacksmith  shop  and  tradin  post — the 
traders  a  thief. 

Some  charitable  person  had  rubbed  "thief"  from 
this  notice,  and  had  written  in  "good  feller"  instead; 
but  both  titles  stayed  there. 

"You  pays  yer  money  and  takes  yer  choice,"  said 
Bush,  grimly,  as  he  read  this  gazette.  "But  I'll  bet 
the  fust  man  was  right." 

Here,  too,  they  learned  that  the  ferryman  at  "Co- 
lumbus," or  the  Loup  Fork  crossing,  had  been  robbed. 

"When  was  that?"  asked  Mont. 

"I  allow  it  was  about  the  middle  of  June.  Me  and 
my  pard  we  crossed  there  June  the  ten,  and  it  was 
some  time  after  that,"  explained  a  short,  thick-set  fel- 
low, whom  the  boys  had  met  before  somewhere. 

"Well,  we  passed  there  on  the  fifth  of  June,"  said 
Barnard.  "Did  the  thieves  get  away  with  much 
money?" 

"Nigh  onto  five  hundred  dollars,  I've  heard  tell; 
but  that's  no  knowin';  it  mought  have  been  five  thou- 


i6o  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

sand.  That  mean  skunk  took  in  heaps  of  coin  at  the 
ferry." 

"Does  he  suspect  anybody?" 

"Couldn't  say;  'twas  after  I  war  thar.  How's  that, 
Dave?"  said  he,  addressing  another  lounger. 

**I  came  by  there  the  day  after  the  robbery,"  replied 
Dave.  "Old  Columbus  was  off  on  the  trail  of  a  couple 
of  suspicious  characters  who  had  swam  the  fork  with 
their  horses,  about  four  miles  up  stream.  The  boys 
at  the  ferry  said  the  old  man  had  a  good  description 
of  the  chaps  whom  they  suspicioned.  One  of  'em  had 
a  hare-lip,  and  'tother  had  a  garne  leg." 

"A  game  leg!"  exclaimed  Johnny.  "That's  Bill 
Bunce!" 

"And  who  is  Bill  Bunce,  my  little  kid?"  asked  the 
stranger,  turning  to  the  boy. 

"Oh,  he's  a  scaly  feller  that  left  this  boy  to  shift  for 
himself,  away  back  on  the  river.  But  you  ain't  noways 
certain  that  this  thief  was  Bill  Bunce,  Johnny,  you 
know,"  said  Hi. 

The  lounging  emigrants  were  so  much  kindled  by 
this  bit  of  possible  evidence  in  the  Loup  Fork  robbery, 
information  of  which  had  slowly  overtaken  them  here, 
that  they  gathered  around  and  expressed  their  opin- 
ions very  freely  about  Bill  Bunce. 

"He'll  swing  from  the  first  tree  he  meets  after  some 
of  us  fellers  finds  him  on  the  trail,  now  ye  bet  yer  life," 
was  one  comment. 


IN  THE  HEART  OF  THE  CONTINENT  i6i 

"Thar's  nary  tree  between  here  and  Bridger  big 
enough  to  hang  a  man  on,  'cordin'  to  them  things," 
said  another,  waving  his  pipe  toward  the  rude  bulle- 
tins on  the  cabin  wall.  "See,  nothin'  but  *No  wood' 
on  'em,  from  here  to  Salt  Lake,  so  far  as  I  kin  see." 

The  boys,  after  this,  did  find  a  rough  road,  and  they 
were  glad  enough  that  they  were  within  reach  of  help. 
Rose's  drove  of  cattle  was  drawn  upon  often  for  fresh 
recruits  for  the  yoke.  Here,  too,  they  found  the  springs 
often  poisoned  with  alkali.  Some  of  the  shallow  pools 
were  colored  a  dark  brown  with  the  alkali  in  the  soil. 
Others  were  white  about  the  edges  with  a  dry  powder 
which  looked  and  tasted  like  saleratus.  The  cattle 
refused  to  drink  the  stuff;  and  now,  along  the  track, 
they  met  a  great  many  animals  turned  out  to  die, 
suffering  from  the  effects  of  the  alkali  which  they 
carelessly  lapped  up  with  their  scanty  feed.  Here 
and  there  they  met  a  few  poor  fellows  limping  along 
with  all  their  possessions  packed  on  their  backs. 
These  had  lost  their  cattle,  one  by  one,  and  had  been 
obliged  to  abandon  their  wagons  and  baggage.  Tak- 
ing a  sack  of  flour,  a  frying-pan,  a  few  pieces  of  "side 
meat,"  or  bacon,  some  coffee,  and  a  tin  cup,  these 
courageous  fellows  went  forward,  determined  to  get 
through,  somehow.  Usually  they  managed  to  sell 
some  part  of  their  outfit.  The  rest  they  left  by  the 
side  of  the  wagon-track.     But,  begging,  borrowing,  or 


i62  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

buying  from  day  to  day,  they  trudged  on  with  their 
faces  turned  westward — always  westward. 

"Hello!  what's  that  on  that  wagon? — *0r  Bust' — 
and  a  gaudy  old  wagon  it  is,"  said  Hi,  one  day. 

The  wagon  was  a  two-wheeled  affair,  drawn  by  one 
yoke  of  oxen,  and  looking  exactly  like  one-half  of  what 
might  have  been  a  long  vehicle.  On  the  canvas  was 
painted  the  words  "Or  Bust,"  which  had  attracted 
Hi's  attention. 

This  strange-looking  craft  was  creeping  along  in  the 
shadow  of  Independence  Rock,  when  overtaken  by  our 
party.  Barnard,  recognizing  the  good-natured  young 
fellow  who  was  driving,  said: 

"What's  happened  to  your  wagon  since  we  saw  you 
at  Council  Bluffs?" 

The  man  laughed  lightly,  and  replied:  "Well,  you 
see,  Jake  and  I,  we  couldn't  agree  with  our  pardners, 
Jake's  brother  Joe  and  Bill  Jenness — so  we  divi- 
ded." 

"How?     Divided  everything?" 

"Sartin,  sartin.  We  couldn't  go  on  without  a 
wagon,  you  know.  So  we  sawed  the  old  thing  in  two. 
Thar  was  a  ch'ice;  the  fore  part  had  the  tongue,  and 
we  played  a  game  of  seven-up  for  the  ch'ice.  Joe  and 
Bill  held  over  us — beat  us  by  one  p'int;  and  they've 
gone  on  with  their  share  of  the  waggin." 

"So  your  brother  Joe  has  gone  with  the  'California' 


IN  THE  HEART  OF  THE  CONTINENT  163 

part  of  your  wagon?"  said  Mont,  addressing  Jake 
Russell,  one  of  a  quarrelsome  family. 

"That's  about  the  size  of  it,"  surlily  replied  Jake. 
"It  was  'Californy  or  Bust.*  Joe  and  Bill  have  got 
the  'Californy'  and  we've  got  the  'Bust.'  Howso- 
ever, if  you  go  round  on  the  other  side,  you'll  see  we've 
got  'Californy'  there,  too.  We've  got  the  entire 
thing,  but  a  feller  has  to  go  all  around  us  to  see  it." 

"Couldn't  you  agree  about  the  road?"  asked  Hi, 
with  some  curiosity. 

"No,  it  was  beans." 

"Beans?"  said  Hi,  opening  his  eyes. 

"Yes,  beans,"  answered  Jacob,  growing  angry.  "I 
don't  give  in  to  no  ornery  half-baked  sucker,  even  if 
he  is  my  brother.  An'  when  it  comes  to  beans  cooked 
in  a  ground  oven,  when  wood  is  plenty,  and  you  have 
time  to  dig  yer  oven  and  can  spare  yer  camp-kettle 
long  enough  to  bake  'em  over  night,  I'm  thar.  But 
beans  is  better  and  more  economical-like  stewed. 
Leastways,  I  think  so.  Joe,  he  don't  think  so.  Bill 
Jenness — well,  he  always  was  a  pore  shoat — he  don't 
think  so.  So  we  divided  the  plunder  and  are  going 
through.  Gee!  Lion! — whar  be  yer  goin'  to?  The 
most  obstinatest  steer  I  ever  see.     Good  day!" 

And  the  men  who  preferred  their  beans  stewed 
drove  on. 

Independence   Rock  was  such   a  famous  landmark 


i64  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

that  our  boys  could  not  pass  it  without  climbing  it. 
The  rock  is  an  immense  ledge,  rising  nearly  one  hun- 
dred feet  from  the  ground;  it  is  almost  flat  on  top, 
and  covers  a  space  equal  to  an  acre  or  two.  All  around 
it  the  country  is  undulating,  but  without  any  large 
rocks.  Independence  Rock  looms  up  like  a  huge  flat 
bowlder  left  there  by  mistake  when  the  world  was 
built.  Resting  their  team,  the  party  scrambled  up 
the  enormous  mass.  The  top  was  worn  by  the  flow  of 
uncounted  ages.  Here  and  there  were  depressions  in 
which  little  pools  left  by  the  late  rains  were  standing; 
and  all  around  on  the  smooth  places  of  the  rock  were 
chiseled  the  names,  or  initials,  of  passing  emigrants. 
Some  of  these  were  laboriously  carved,  some  were 
painted  with  the  soft  tar  which  should  have  been  saved 
to  use  on  wagon-wheels.  On  the  perpendicular  wall 
of  the  rock,  facing  the  west,  was  a  roughly  cut  inscrip- 
tion setting  forth  how  "Joshua  F.  Gibbonson,  a  native 
of  Norway,  aged  24  yrs,"  was  buried  near.  Another 
gave  the  name  and  age  of  a  young  woman,  also  sleep- 
ing close  at  hand. 

Arthur,  walking  over  the  multitude  of  letters  in- 
scribed on  the  top  of  the  rock,  suddenly  paused,  and, 
looking  down  at  his  feet,  exclaimed:  "Bill  Bunce!" 

The  rest,  hurrying  up,  saw  on  the  rugged  surface 
this  inscription:  W.  Bunce. 

"But  his  name  is  Bill.     That's  a  W,"  said  Johnny, 


IN  THE  HEART  OF  THE  CONTINENT    165 

gazing  at  the  mysterious  letters  with  a  sort  of  fasci- 
nation. 

Mont  and  Barney  laughed,  and  Arty  said:  "To  be 
sure  his  name  is  Bill,  but  it  was  William  before  it  was 
Bill,  and  so  he  spells  it  with  a  W." 

"I  don't  believe  it's  Bill  Bunce,  anyhow,"  said  Hi. 
"He  wouldn't  be  such  a  fool  as  to  leave  his  name  like 
that  here,  where  he  knows  people  are  looking  for 
him." 

Mont  got  down  on  his  knees  to  inspect  the  letters, 
as  if  he  thought  they  might  give  him  some  clue  to  the 
man  who  had  carved  them,  and  had  then  gone  on, 
leaving  this  mute  witness  behind  him.  He  shook  his 
head,  and  said: 

"I  don't  know,  Hi.  Guilty  men,  somehow,  always 
drop  something  by  which  they  can  be  traced.  If  he 
stole  old  Columbus's  money,  it  is  just  as  likely  as  not 
he  would  be  foolish  enough  to  put  this  here.  Any- 
how, I  guess  this  is  Bill  Bunce's  autograph." 

Nothing  positive  came  of  the  discussion,  but  Johnny 
lingered  over  the  letters,  and  murmured  to  himself: 

"If  they  could  only  tell,  now!" 

"But  they  are  silent  letters,  Johnny,"  whispered 
Arty,  who  had  stayed  behind  with  his  little  mate. 
The  boy  laughed,  without  understanding  why,  and  the 
youngsters  left  the  inscription  still  staring  up  to  the 
sky  above  the  rock. 


i66  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

Passing  Devil's  Gate,  and  camping  on  the  western 
side  of  that  famous  gap  a  few  days  after,  the  boys  felt 
that  they  were  at  last  in  the  Rocky  Mountains.  The 
Gate  is  a  huge  chasm,  its  black  rocky  walls  towering 
up  on  either  side.  Westward  is  a  grassy  plain,  dotted 
with  trees,  and  affording  a  charming  camping-ground. 
Here  the  young  emigrants  pitched  their  tent,  in  the 
midst  of  a  mighty  company.  From  a  hundred  camp- 
fires  arose  the  odors  of  many  suppers,  and,  as  the  sun 
went  down  behind  the  purple  peaks,  the  cheerful 
groups  made  a  pretty  picture,  framed  by  the  blue  and 
gray  ledges,  covered  with  vines,  which  stretched  around 
the  amphitheatre. 

"That's  a  mighty  knowin'  dog  of  your'n,"  said  a 
visitor  lounging  by  the  camp-stove  and  watching  Arty 
cooking  flapjacks. 

**Yes,"  said  Arty;  "it's  agreed  that  he  is  to  have 
every  flapjack  that  I  lose  when  I  toss  'em  up — so;"  and 
he  tossed  his  pan  dexterously  in  the  air,  and  brought 
his  flapjack  down  again  in  it,  brown  side  up. 

"Sometimes  when  the  wind  blows,  I  can't  exactly 
calculate  the  force  of  it,  and  away  goes  the  flapjack 
over  on  the  ground.  That's  Pete's,  and  he  goes  for  it 
before  it  Hghts.  He  can  tell  whether  it  will  miss  the 
pan  or  not." 

"And  I'll  match  Arty  at  tossing  flapjacks  with 
any  grown  man  on  the  plains,"  said  Hi,  with  a  glow 


IN  THE  HEART  OF  THE  CONTINENT  167 

of  honest  pride.  "You  bet  that  dog  don't  get  many, 
'cept  when  the  wind  blows  variable-Hke." 

Just  then,  Pete,  who  was  assiduously  gnawing  a 
bone,  ran  to  Arty,  crying  with  pain,  and  put  his  head 
on  the  boy's  knee.  Arthur  tenderly  stroked  the  poor 
brute's  jaw,  and  exclaimed: 

"Poor  old  Pete!  You  see  he  has  had  a  bad  blow  on 
the  side  of  his  head  at  some  time.  I  think  some  of  the 
small  bones  are  broken.  When  he  gets  his  jaw  into  a 
certain  position,  it  hurts  him  confoundedly,  and  he  runs 
to  me.  I  found  out  that  I  could  relieve  him  by  softly 
pressing  the  place — so  fashion.     See!" 

A  sudden  light  gleamed  in  the  man's  face,  and  he 
said: 

"I  know  that  dog.  I  saw  him  back  on  the  Platte 
with  a  couple  of  chaps — scamps  I  should  say.  One 
had  a  game  leg,  and  I  saw  him  bang  that  very  iden- 
tical dog  with  the  butt  of  his  gun,  just  because  he 
scared  up  a  big  jack-rabbit.     Powerful  cruel  it  was." 

"Aha!"  said  Barney.  "That's  Bill  Bunce  again. 
Where  was  this,  stranger?" 

"Well,  I  disremember  now.  But  I  allow  it  was  on 
the  other  side  of  Chimney  Rock,  say  about  the  latter 
part  of  June." 

"That  would  give  the  thieves  time  to  come  up  from 
Loup  Fork,"  said  Barney,  who  told  their  visitor  the 
story   of  Bill    Bunce   and   his   companions.     But   the 


i68  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

stranger  declared  that  the  only  companion  of  the  man 
with  the  dog  was  a  fellow  with  a  hare-lip.     He  added: 

"And  I  just  believe  that  there  dog  got  up  and  dusted 
out  of  that,  he  was  treated  so  all-fired  mean." 

Soon  after  this,  the  emigrants  entered  the  great  pas- 
sage through  the  mountains — South  Pass.  It  was  not 
easy  to  realize  that  they  were  actually  going  over  the 
Rocky  Mountains.  The  emigrant  road  gradually  as- 
cended the  enormous  ridge  which  forms  the  backbone 
of  the  continent — so  gradually  that  the  ascent  was 
hardly  noticed.  To  the  north  and  south  were  grand 
peaks,  purple  in  the  distance,  silvery  with  streaks  of 
snow,  and  piercing  the  clouds.  Nearer,  the  gray  masses 
were  broken  into  chasms,  and  were  partly  covered 
with  a  stunted  growth  of  trees.  As  they  pressed  on, 
the  road  mounted  higher  and  higher.  But  the  way  was 
easy,  broad,  and  pleasant  to  travel.  The  nights  were 
cold — so  cold  that  the  boys  were  thankful  for  the  shel- 
ter of  their  tent;  and  they  cowered  under  all  the  blan- 
kets and  coverings  they  could  collect.  But  the  days 
were  hot,  and  though  the  travelers  might  turn  out 
in  the  morning  air,  their  teeth  chattering  with  cold 
they  marched  along  at  noon  perspiring  in  the  sun. 

Snow  crept  down  nearer  and  nearer  to  their  track, 
from  up  among  the  steep  slopes  which  hung  above  the 
pass.  While  camping  one  day  in  this  region,  Captain 
Rose  and  some  of  our  boys  went  up  to  the  snow-banks 


IN  THE  HEART  OF  THE  CONTINENT    169 

and  had  a  July  game  of  snow-ball.  They  brought  back 
flowers  gathered  at  the  edge  of  the  melting  snow;  and 
they  reported  butterflies  and  mosquitoes  fluttering 
over  the  banks,  as  if  brought  to  life  by  the  dazzling 
sun.  These  reports  seemed  like  travelers'  tales,  diffi- 
cult of  belief,  but  they  were  all  verified  to  the  satisfac- 
tion of  the  unbelievers. 

One  day,  they  reached  a  spring  of  which  they  had 
often  heard.  They  approached  it  with  a  certain  feel- 
ing of  awe.  It  was  on  the  dividing  ridge  of  the  con- 
tinent. It  was  a  boggy  pool,  rising  out  of  a  mass  of 
rock  and  turf,  trampled  by  many  feet  and  spreading 
out  into  a  considerable  space.  Some  wayfarer  had  set 
up  a  rude  sign-board,  on  which  was  inscribed  the  name 
— "Pacific  Spring."  Stepping  from  rock  to  rock,  the 
boys  made  their  way  to  the  fountain-head,  and  silently 
gazed  on  the  source  of  a  stream  that  divided  itself 
between  the  Atlantic  and  the  Pacific. 

Here  the  emigrant  trail  pitched  abruptly  down  a 
rocky  cafion  to  the  west.  The  water  flowing  from  the 
spring  and  saturating  the  grassy  soil  was  parted  by  a 
low,  sharp  ledge  of  rock.  From  this,  two  little  rivulets 
crept  away,  one  to  the  east,  one  to  the  west.  One 
gurgled  down  into  the  caiion,  was  joined  by  number- 
less runnels  from  the  snow-peaks  above,  meandered 
away  for  many  miles,  sank  into  Green  River,  flowed 
south  and  west  to  the  Colorado,  entered  the  Gulf  of 
California,   and   was   lost   in   the   Pacific.     The   other 


170  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

slipped  silently  down  the  long  slope  by  which  the  boy 
emigrants  had  come,  joined  itself  to  other  tiny  streams, 
and  so,  finding  the  far-ofF  Missouri,  by  the  way  of  the 
Yellowstone,  reached  the  Mississippi,  the  Gulf  of 
Mexico,  and  the  Atlantic. 

"Go,  little  stream,"  said  Mont,  **and  tell  the  folks 
at  home  that  we  have  left  the  old  world.  Boys!  this 
is  a  new  world  before  us  now." 

"We  are  on  the  down-hill  grade,"  added  Hi.  "We 
can  scoot  to  Californ)^  now.  Westward  it  is,  and  we 
are  a-goin'  with  the  stream." 

Barney  turned  and  looked  back.  "We  are  on  the 
wall.     Shall  we  go  down  on  the  other  side,  Arty?" 

But  Arty  said:  "I  should  be  glad  if  I  could  send  a 
message  back  to  the  folks  at  Sugar  Grove.  It  would 
be  like  a  message  out  of  the  sea.  As  long  as  we  can't 
do  that,  suppose  we  follow  the  other  stream  to  the 
Pacific?" 

"We  cannot  be  sentimental  over  this  spring,  my 
boy,"  said  Mont,  laughing.  "But,  as  Hi  says,  we  are 
going  with  the  current  now.  That's  it!  Westward  is 
the  word!" 

"Come  on,  boys!"  shouted  Captain  Rose,  from  the 

down-hill  road.     "It's   a   rough  drive  yet   to  Sunset 

C-      )> 
anon. 

So  the  young  fellows  followed  the  stream,  and  turned 

their  faces  again  to  the  west. 


CHAPTER  XIII 

LAUGHTER   AND   TEARS 

"Waugh!  how  I  hate  hog-meat!"  exclaimed  Bar- 
nard, looking  in  his  plate  of  fried  bacon  with  an  ex- 
pression of  extreme  disgust. 

"And  no  game  since  week  before  last,"  added 
Arthur,  dolefully. 

"When  you  can't  get  butter,  you  must  make  salt 
pork  do,  my  old  grandmother  used  to  say,"  was  Mont 
Morse's  wise  comment  on  this  outbreak  of  discontent. 
"We  enlisted  for  the  campaign  with  hog-meat,  boys, 
and  you  won't  back  out  now,  will  you?" 

"But  we  did  reckon  on  more  game,  you  know," 
argued  Barney;  "and  we  have  had  precious  Httle  since 
we  got  out  of  the  antelope  country." 

"You  disremember  the  dogs  and  frogs,"  said  Hi, 
with  a  grimace. 

Both  the  Stevens  boys  laughed.  When  they  were 
in  the  prairie-dog  region,  they  had  killed  and  eaten  all 
the  animals  they  could  get  at.  But  Hi  had  steadfastly 
refused  to  "eat  dog,"  as  he  expressed  it,  and  his  brother 
Tom  had  thought  it  necessary  to  follow  his  example. 

171 


172  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

It  was  in  vain  that  Mont  had  urged  that  ''prairie- 
dogs"  were  not  dogs  at  all,  but  a  kind  of  marmot; 
that  they  fed  on  roots  and  vegetables,  and  that  their 
meat  was  as  sweet  and  wholesome  as  that  of  rabbits. 

"You  needn't  tell  me,"  was  Hi's  constant  reply. 
**They  set  up  on  end  and  bark  just  like  dogs.  They  live 
with  rattlesnakes  and  owls,  and  they  are  not  fit  for  a 
white  man  to  eat.  Fremont  may  eat  dogs,  but  I  won't, 
until  I'm  starving." 

His  refusal  to  partake  of  this  strange  food,  as  he  con- 
sidered it,  gave  the  others  a  larger  share.  The  prairie- 
dogs,  numerous  though  they  were,  were  never  plenty 
in  the  camp.  They  sat  up  cunningly  on  their  haunches 
and  barked  at  the  hunters,  very  much  in  the  squeaky 
fashion  of  toy-dogs;  but,  when  shot  at,  they  tumbled 
into  their  holes  and  were  seldom  recovered,  even  though 
severely  wounded.  They  posted  themselves  by  the 
opening  of  their  dens,  each  one  a  sentinel  to  warn  of 
danger.  When  they  fell  over,  their  comrades  below 
dragged  them  into  the  burrow,  where  the  young  hunt- 
ers could  hear  them  whining  and  crying,  in  a  half- 
human  fashion,  over  their  wounds.  They  were  good 
to  eat,  but  tender-hearted  Arthur,  much  as  he  desired 
a  change  from  their  diet  of  "side-meat,"  never  could 
take  pleasure  in  killing  the  pretty  little  creatures. 

As  for  frogs,  when  the  party  occasionally  reached  a 
pond  of  melted  snow-water,  warmed  by  the  summer 


LAUGHTER  AND  TEARS  173 

sun  and  musical  with  frogs,  Mont  rolled  up  his  trou- 
sers, and  armed  with  a  thick  stick,  waded  in  and  slew 
them,  right  and  left. 

"But  Boston  folks  consider  them  a  great  luxury," 
he  remonstrated,  when  Hi  and  Tom  expressed  their 
profound  disgust  at  such  a  proceeding.  "Take  off  the 
hind-legs,  skin  them,  and  fry  them — what  can  you 
want  better?" 

"Hog-meat,"  replied  Hi,  sententiously. 

But  it  must  be  confessed  that  Hi  looked  on  with  in- 
terest while  Mont  and  Barnard  daintily  nibbled  at  the 
delicate  bones  of  the  frogs'  legs,  nicely  browned  and 
having  all  the  appearance  of  fried  chicken. 

"Stands  to  reason,"  muttered  Hi,  with  his  mouth 
watering,  "that  frogs  is  vermin,  and  vermin  ain't  fit 
to  eat. 

They  were  drawing  near  Salt  Lake  City  now,  and 
even  the  small  game  which  Hi  and  Tom  despised  was 
no  longer  to  be  had.  Occasionally  they  shot  a  hare, 
one  of  the  long-eared,  long-legged  kind  known  as  the 
jackass-rabbit.  Sage-hens,  too,  had  been  plentiful  in 
some  localities,  and  though  the  flesh  of  these  was  dark 
and  bitter  with  the  wild  sage  on  which  they  fed,  the 
addition  of  a  brace  of  them  to  their  daily  fare  was  a 
great  event.  Now,  however,  they  were  reduced  to 
their  staple  of  smoked  "hog-meat"  once  more. 

They  had  been  lying  by  for  a  few  days,  hoping  that 


174  THE   BOY   EMIGRANTS 

they  might  find  some  game  while  they  recruited  their 
stock.  John  Rose  and  Mont  had  scoured  the  coun- 
try with  their  rifles,  but  they  brought  back  nothing 
from  their  long  tramps.  Flour  biscuit,  fried  salt  meat, 
and  coffee  without  milk  formed  their  regular  bill  of 
fare  now.  The  cows  in  the  drove  had  ceased  to  give 
milk,  and  the  boys  were  reduced  to  the  "short  com- 
mons" which  they  had  been  taught  to  expect. 

Nevertheless,  they  were  better  provided  than  many 
emigrants  whom  they  met  on  the  way.  A  company 
of  Germans,  with  whom  they  travelled,  had  nothing  in 
their  stores  but  smoked  sausages,  flour,  and  coffee. 

**No  sugar?"  asked  Arty,  in  amazement. 

"Nein,"  civilly  replied  the  genial  German. 

"No  baking-powders?  no  salt?" 

*'Nein.  No  kraut,"  responded  the  traveler  with 
gloom  in  his  face. 

Nevertheless,  the  light-hearted  Germans  had  a 
merry  camp.  And,  when  they  marched  on  by  day, 
they  locked  arms  over  each  other's  shoulders,  and 
kept  step  to  the  music  of  their  own  songs,  singing  as 
they  went. 

"Queer  chaps  those  singing  Dutchmen,"  mused  Hi, 
as  he  watched  them,  day  by  day  striding  along  and 
singing  the  marching-songs  of  their  native  land.  The 
boys  heard  one  of  their  favorite  pieces  so  often  that 
Mont  caught  the  words  and  wrote  them  down.     So 


LAUGHTER  AND  TEARS  175 

one  day,  to  the  astonishment  of  the  rest  of  the  party, 
Mont  and  Arty  locked  arms  and  marched  down  the 
trail,  singing  thus: 

"Wohlauf  in  Gottes  schone  Welt! 

Ade!  ade!  ade! 
Die  Luft  ist  blau,  und  griin  das  Feld — 

Ade!  ade!  ade! 
Die  Berge  gliih'n  wie  Edelstein; 
Ich  wandre  mit  dem  Sonnenschein 
In's  weite  Land  hinein. 

Ade!  ade! 

"Du  traute  Stadt  am  Bergeshang, 

Ade!  ade!  ade! 
Du  lioher  Thurm,  du  Glockenklang, 

Ade!  ade!  ade! 
Ihr  Hauser  alle,  wohl  bekannt, 
Noch  einmal  wink'  ich  mit  der  Hand, 
Und  nun  seit  abgewandt! 

Ade!  ade! 

"An  meinem  Wege  flieszt  der  Bach — 

Ade!  ade!  ade! 
Der  ruft  den  letzten  Grusz  mir  nach — 

Ade!  ade!  ade! 
Ach,  Gott!  da  wird  so  eigen  mir, 
So  milde  weh'n  die  Lufte  hier, 
Als  war's  ein  Grusz  von  dir — 

Ade!  ade! 

"Ein  Grusz  von  dir,  du  schlankes  Kind — 
Ade!  ade!  ade! 
Doch  nun  den  Berg  hinab  geschwind — 
Ade!  ade!  ade! 


176  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

Wer  wandern  will,  der  darf  nicht  steh'n, 
Der  darf  niemals  zuriicke  seh'n, 
Musz  immer  weiter  geh'n. 
Ade!  ade!" 


"But  that's  Dutch!"  exclaimed  Hi.  "Give  us  the 
Enghsh  of  it!" 

"No;  it's  German,"  said  Arty,  laughing  at  his  suc- 
cess as  a  "Singing  Dutchman." 

"What's  the  odds?"  rephed  Hi.  "It's  as  Dutch  as 
Dutch  kin  be.  I  don't  see  no  difference  between  Dutch 
and  German." 

"Well,"  said  Mont,  "we  will  give  you  the  English 
of  it  some  day."  And  when,  not  long  after,  Mont 
read  his  translation  of  the  verses  by  the  night  camp-fire, 
the  whole  party  were  loud  in  their  praises  of  their 
marching-song. 

"It's  a  great  thing  to  be  a  scholar,"  sighed  Hi, 
with  a  glance  of  envy  at  the  rude  verses  of  the  young 
"Boston  feller."  And  he  murmured,  with  a  thrill  of 
honest  admiration:  "That  thar  feller  kin  set  a  wagon- 
tire  with  any  man  on  the  plains.  It  do  beat  all  how 
some  folks  is  gifted!" 

They  overtook  the  "Singing  Dutchmen,"  one  bright 
day  soon  after  this,  and  great  was  the  delight  of  those 
sturdy  trampers  to  see  our  boys  marching  by,  sedately 
singing  as  they  went  Mont's  free  translation  of  their 
own  song,  something  Hke  this: 


LAUGHTER  AND  TEARS  177 

"Forward  in  God's  beautiful  world! 

Farewell!  farewell!  farewell! 
The  sky  is  blue,  and  green  the  fields — 

Farewell!  farewell!  farewell! 
The  mountains  gleam  like  jewels  bright; 
I  wander  in  the  warm  sunlight, 
Far  into  distant  lands. 

Farewell!  farewell! 


'Dear  village  bv  the  mountain-side. 
Farewell!  farewell!  farewell! 

Thou  lofty  tower,  ye  chiming  bells. 
Farewell!  farewell!  farewell! 

Ye  happy  homes,  well-known  to  me. 

Toward  you  once  more  I  wave  my  hand, 

But  turn  away  mine  eyes! 
Farewell!  farewell! 

'  Beside  my  pathway  flows  the  brook — 
Farewell!  farewell!  farewell! 

Which  calls  to  me  a  last  farewell — 
Farewell!  farewell!  farewell! 

Ah,  Heaven  above,  so  sad  am  I! 

The  zephyrs  float  so  softly  by. 

As  if  they  brought  from  thee  a  sigh — 
Farewell!  farewell! 

'From  thee  a  sigh,  thou  fairest  maid! 

Farewell!  farewell!  farewell! 
But  down  the  hillside  now  I  speed — 

Farewell!  farewell!  farewell! 
For  he  who  wanders  must  not  pause. 
Nor  once  behind  him  cast  his  glance, 
But  forward,  forward  march. 

Farewell!  farewell!" 


178  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

**Ach!  it  is  better  as  never  vas,"  cried  the  honest 
Germans. 

"Where  get  you  so  much  good  song,  mine  friendt?" 
asked  one  of  the  party,  his  eyes  sparkHng  with  en- 
thusiasm. 

"We  borrowed  it  from  you,"  said  Mont,  modestly. 
*'l  hope  you  don't  think  us  rude." 

"Rudt?  It  is  a  what  you  call  a  gompHment,  and 
we  to  you  are  much  obliged,"  was  the  hearty  reply. 

"He  did  it,  all  by  himself,"  said  Hi,  proudly.  "He 
turned  it  into  English  from  Dutch,  and  he  sings  it 
both  ways  like  a  reg'lar  medder-lark — so  he  does." 

"Yaw,"  answered  the  German  emigrant,  as  if  in 
doubt  whether  he  understood  Hi's  explanations. 

Barnard,  not  to  be  outdone,  drilled  Arthur  and  Tom 
in  a  marching-song  of  his  own,  and  one  day  produced 
this  novelty. 

"When  we  lived  in  Vermont,"  said  Barney,  "there 
was  a  military  company  in  our  village.  There  were 
not  men  enough  to  make  two  companies,  the  place  was 
so  small.  So  the  same  men  appeared  as  an  infantry 
company  one  month,  and  as  an  artillery  company  the 
next.  They  had  a  snare  drum  and  a  bass  drum  when 
they  turned  out  as  infantry;  but  when  they  paraded 
as  artillery,  with  one  cannon,  they  had  a  spare  man, 
so  they  used  to  carry  two  bass  drums  and  the  snare 
drum.     This  is  the  way  the  infantry  band  went."     And 


LAUGHTER  AND  TEARS  179 

Barney  got  up   and   marched   around  the  camp-fire, 
Arty  and  Tom  following  with — 

"Boomer  lacker!  boomer  lacker! 
Boom!  boom!  boom! 
Boomer  lacker!  boomer  lacker! 
Boom!  boom!  boom!" 

Everybody  laughed  uproariously  at  the  whimsical 
sight  of  the  lads,  who  were  half  undressed  for  the 
night,  as  they  paraded  around  and  about,  chanting 
the  odd  melody  of  the  village  drum-corps.  Then, 
with  solemn  step  and  slow,  they  changed  their  march- 
ing-tune to  the  statelier  music  of  the  artillery  band. 

"Here  go  the  two  bass  drums  and  the  tenor,"  cried 
Arty. 

"Boom  dum  dardy!  Boom  dum  dardy! 
How's  your  marm? 
Boom  dum  dardy!  Boom  dum  dardy! 

How's  your  marm? 
Oh,  she's  boozy,  boozy,  boozy,  boozy! 
Boom  dum  dardy!  Boom  dum  dardy!" 
&c.,  &c. 

"Ho!  ho!  what  nonsense!"  roared  Hi.  "But  it*s 
just  like  a  couple  of  bass  drums.  I  think  I  hear  'em 
now" — and,  lying  back  on  his  pile  of  blankets.  Hi 
laughed  again,  Mont  and  the  rest  joining  in  the  chorus. 

The  boys  practised  this  marching-song  as  they  had 
the  others,  and  their  fellow-travelers  were  often  there- 


i8o  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

after  edified  with  the  rough  music  which  the  party 
made  as  they  stepped  out  with  alacrity,  chanting — 

"Boomer  lacker!  boomer  lacker! 
Boom!  boom!  boom!" 

Or  they  assumed  a  more  funereal  gait  as  they  walked, 
and  sung — 

"Boom  dum  dardy!  Boom  dum  dardy! 
How's  your  marm?" 

Their  laughter  was  hushed  when  Nance,  whose  fam- 
ily had  come  up  with  them  lately,  marched  up  to  their 
tent  one  night  with  the  solemn  announcement  of  "The 
baby's  dead!" 

"What  baby?"  they  asked,  with  a  startled  air. 

"Just  like  stoopid  men-folks,  you  air!"  replied  the 
girl.  But  she  added,  with  a  softened  tone:  "Why,  it's 
the  Messer  folkses  baby.  Them  that  was  upsot  in 
Dry  Creek  and  had  a  lovely  bonnit  along." 

"It  was  the  sick  baby  that  we  tended  down  there 
just  this  side  of  Papeses,  ye  know,  Arty,"  said  Tom, 
with  solemnity. 

Old  Mrs.  Rose,  Captain  John's  mother,  who  sat  near 
by,  said:  "I  knowed  she'd  never  raise  that  there  child. 
It  alius  was  a  weakly  thing.  It's  a  marcy  it's  took 
away  now" — and  the  good  old  woman  knocked  the 
ashes  out  of  her  pipe,  and  sighed. 


LAUGHTER  AND  TEARS 


i«i 


**  Death  in  the  camp,"  thought  Barney  to  himself, 
and  he  looked  around  and  wondered  how  it  would 
seem  if  death  was  in  their  camp  as  it  was  in  their 
neighbor's.  His  eyes  rested  lovingly  on  his  brother's 
golden  head,  and  he  asked:  **Can  we  be  of  any  ser- 
vice, do  you  think,  Nance?" 

"I  reckon.  The  baby's  to  be  buried  at  sun-up  to- 
morrow; and  dad  said  if  one  of  you  fellers  would  go 
down  to  the  mouth  of  the  canon  with  him  to-night, 
he'd  help  dig  a  little  grave."  And  the  girl  turned  away 
to  hide  her  tears  as  she  uttered  the  words  so  full  of 
sadness  to  all  ears. 

The  boys  eagerly  volunteered  to  assist  in  everything 
that  was  to  be  done;  and  by  the  edge  of  a  dry  ravine, 
under  a  lone  tree,  they  hollowed  a  little  cell  before 
they  slept. 

Next  day,  before  the  camps  were  broken  up,  all  of 
the  emigrants  on  the  ground  gathered  about  the 
wagon  of  the  Messers,  where  a  little  white  bundle  was 
lying  on  a  pile  of  yokes,  covered  smoothly  with  a 
blanket.  On  this  white  shape  was  laid  a  poor  little 
knot  of  stunted  cactus-flowers,  the  only  blooming 
thing  which  the  arid  plains  produced.  Near  by 
was  the  mother,  crouched  on  the  ground  and  moan- 
ing to  herself:  "Such  a  little  thing! — such  a  little 
thing!" 

"It's  powerful  rough  to  have  to  bury  the  baby  out 


1 82  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

yere  in  the  wilderness-like,"  complained  the  father. 
**I  wish  I  hadn't  a-come." 

"Don't  take  on  so,  ole  man,"  said  his  wife.  "He's 
better  on't — he's  better  on't." 

The  youngest  boys  raised  the  burden  at  a  signal 
from  Captain  Rose.  They  bore  it  to  the  open  grave, 
all  the  company  following  with  uncovered  heads. 
Then  the  little  white  bundle  was  lowered  tenderly  into 
the  earth.  The  tearful  mother  picked  up  the  yellow 
cactus-flowers,  which  had  fallen  to  the  ground,  kissed 
them,  and  cast  them  in.  Then  stout  branches  of  sage- 
brush were  laid  over  the  figure  beneath,  forming  a 
shelter  from  the  soil. 

A  white-haired  old  man,  the  patriarch  of  one  of  the 
companies,  lifted  up  his  hands  and  prayed  by  the  open 
grave.  There  was  a  stifled  sigh  here  and  there  in  the 
little  assemblage  when  he  spoke  of  "the  loved  ones 
left  behind,"  and  of  others  "who  had  gone  on  before." 
Then  he  said  a  few  pleasant  and  cheery  words  to  the 
mourning  parents,  who  were  leaving  their  only  child 
here  alone  in  the  heart  of  the  continent. 

"And  yet,"  he  said,  "not  here,  but  up  yonder,"  and 
he  pointed  upward,  where  Nance,  whose  wondering 
eye  involuntarily  followed  the  speaker's,  saw  a  little 
bird  cheerily  winging  its  solitary  way  across  the  rosy 
sky.  She  plucked  her  mother's  sleeve  and  whispered: 
"I'm  so  glad  I  picked  them  posies!" 


LAUGHTER  AND  TEARS  183 

The  grave  was  filled  up,  the  simple  ceremony  was 
over,  and  each  party  betook  itself  to  preparing  for 
another  day's  journey. 

"  Poor  little  thing ! "  said  Mont.  "  Its  journey  is  done 
early;  and  it  rests  just  as  well  here  as  anywhere." 

'Tm  glad  they  buried  it  in  the  morning,"  added 
Arthur.  '*It  is  not  nearly  so  sad  as  it  is  in  the  eve- 
ning, when  the  shadows  creep  and  creep,  just  as  if  they 
would  never  stop  creeping.  Seems  to  me  it's  a  good 
thing  to  bury  children  at  sunrise.  I  don't  know  why, 
though." 

"Neither  do  I,  Arty,"  said  Hi;  "but  a  buryin'  is  a 
solemn  thing,  for  all  that.  I  allow  it's  the  solemnest 
thing  a-goin'.  I  was  a-thinkin'  just  now,  when  we  was 
takin'  down  the  tent,  of  a  hymn  my  sister  Pamely 
Ann  used  to  sing.  By  gum,  now!  I've  forgot  the 
words,  but  they're  powerful  nice,"  added  Hi,  looking 
rather  foolish.  "Something  about  pitching  your  tent, 
anyhow." 

"Oh,  yes!  I  remember,"  said  Arty,  brightly;   "it  is 

this: 

"  'Here  in  the  body  pent, 

Absent  from  thee  I  roam, 
Yet  nightly  pitch  my  moving  tent 
A  day's  march  nearer  home.*  " 

"That's  it!  that's  it!  Good  boy,  Arty!"  said  Hi, 
with  shining  eyes.     "Now,  d'yer  know,  I  often  have 


i84  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

them  thar  words  a-buzzin'  through  my  head  when  we 
set  up  the  tent,  nights,  all  along  this  yere  trail?" 

**So  do  I,  Hi,"  answered  Mont.  "And  so  I  do  when 
we  take  it  down  next  day,  because,  somehow,  the  place 
where  we  have  spent  even  one  night  seems  like  home 
when  we  live  out  of  doors,  as  it  were,  and  go  on,  know- 
ing we  shall  never  see  it  again." 

"Well,  we're  getting  really  sentimental,  Mont,"  said 
Barnard,  "and  all  along  of  that  little  funeral." 

"I  allow  that  a  funeral,  big  or  little,  is  the  solemnest 
thing  out.  Whoa  haw!  Bally!  whar  in  thunder  are 
yer  goin'  ter?"  And  Hi  drove  on  in  the  train  that 
moved  out  of  camp. 

Nance  trudged  along  in  the  dust  behind  the  Mis- 
sourian's  wagon,  holding  on  by  one  hand  to  the  tail- 
board, by  way  of  speechless  sympathy.  The  poor 
mother  sat  looking  out  from  the  wagon  cover  as  the 
team  moved  slowly  away.  She  saw  the  deserted  camp- 
ing-ground, where  a  few  dying  fires  were  smoldering 
in  ashes.  She  even  marked  the  lame  and  worn-out 
steer  that  some  emigrant  had  left  behind,  and  which 
now  stood  looking  wistfully  after  the  departing  train. 
But  most  she  noted  the  little  mound,  fresh  with  yellow 
earth,  and  decently  fenced  about  with  broken  wagon- 
tires,  by  the  lone  tree.  The  morning  sun  gilded  the 
small  heap  of  soil  and  deluged  all  the  plain  with  un- 
supportable  brightness.     She  shaded  her  eyes  with  her 


LAUGHTER  AND  TEARS  185 

hand  and  moaned:   "Such  a  Httle  thing! — such  a  Httle 
thing!" 

Nance's  brown  hand  closed  tenderly  on  the  woman's 
gown,  and  a  few  gracious  tears  dropped  in  the  dust  as 
she  walked. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

IN    MORMONDOM 

The  way  now  grew  more  and  more  crowded.  It 
seemed  as  if  the  teams  sprang  out  of  the  earth,  they 
were  so  numerous,  and  they  collected  on  the  trail  so 
suddenly  day  by  day.  Desperate  characters,  too,  be- 
came more  frequent  as  the  tide  of  emigration  drew  near 
the  city  of  the  Great  Salt  Lake.  There  was  much  talk 
about  hostile  Indians.  The  boys  had  heard  this  be- 
fore, when  passing  through  the  Rocky  Mountains. 
Once  or  twice,  they  knew  of  Indian  attacks  before  or 
behind  them;  and  one  day  they  had  overtaken  a 
party  of  emigrants  who  had  lost  three  of  their  party 
during  one  of  these  attacks.  They  saw,  with  their 
own  eyes,  the  bullet-holes  in  the  wagons  of  this  com- 
pany, and  they  had  helped  to  bury  the  men  left  dead 
on  the  ground,  after  the  firing  was  over  and  the  cow- 
ardly Indians  were  gone. 

During  that  exciting  and  alarming  time,  they  had 
mounted  guard  every  night  with  the  full  belief  that 
they  might  be  fired  upon  before  morning.  The  cattle 
were  kept  near  the  camp,  and  the  wagons  were  placed 

i86 


IN  MORMONDOM  187 

close  together,  so  that,  in  case  of  an  attack,  they  could 
be  arranged  in  the  form  of  a  circle,  like  a  fort.  In 
those  days,  while  in  a  hostile  country,  they  had  plenty 
of  company  for  mutual  assistance,  however,  and  they 
almost  lost  the  pleasant  little  privacy  of  their  own 
camp.  They  travelled  with  a  crowd;  they  camped 
with  a  crowd.  Nance's  father,  Philo  Dobbs,  and  her 
mother,  and  Nance  herself,  formed  one  small  party; 
and  they  were  glad  to  keep  along  with  the  Roses  and 
our  boys,  for  the  sake  of  better  security  from  danger. 

Now  there  were  rumors  of  the  Goshoots  being  about, 
and  as  the  Goshoots  were  a  marauding  tribe  of  Indians, 
though  not  so  warlike  as  the  Cheyennes,  then  very  un- 
friendly, the  emigrants  were  uneasy.  Between  Fort 
Bridger  and  Salt  Lake  City  was  a  very  bad  section  of 
road.  The  country  was  sandy  and  dry.  Here  and 
there  were  springs  of  poisonous  water,  and  the  undu- 
lating surface  of  the  ground  was  dotted  with  clumps 
of  grease-weed  and  sage-brush;  there  was  nothing  for 
the  animals  to  feed  on,  and  no  water  fit  to  drink.  To 
get  through  this  desolate  region  the  emigrants  travelled 
night  and  day  or,  rather,  one  day  and  one  night. 

The  moon  was  nearly  at  the  full,  and  the  night  was 
pleasant  and  cool.  As  they  drove  on  through  the 
shadowy  hollows  and  over  the  ghostly  ridges,  in  the 
moonlight,  utterly  in  the  wilderness,  even  the  cattle 
seemed  to  think  something  unusual  was  going  forward. 


i88  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

Tige  turned  his  head  every  now  and  then,  and  looked 
at  Arthur,  as  much  as  to  say:  "Queer  doings  these, 
my  boy."  And  Pete,  who  never  barked  except  on 
great  occasions,  stalked  along  by  the  side  of  the  team, 
growling  with  suppressed  excitement.  Everybody  felt 
nervous  and  "scary,"  as  Bush  expressed  it,  but  very 
little  was  said,  and  the  company  swept  on,  wagon  after 
wagon,  bands  of  cattle,  men  on  foot  and  men  on  horse- 
back, silently  pressing  on  in  the  night,  in  the  midst  of 
a  wild,  strange  country,  with  danger  lurking  near  and 
an  unknown  and  untrodden  space  before  them. 

About  midnight,  when  the  men  were  beginning  to 
feel  drowsy,  when  the  women  had  climbed  into  the 
wagons  to  sleep,  and  the  cattle  showed  their  fatigue 
by  lagging,  a  sudden  panic  seized  the  whole  line.  In- 
stantly, the  loose  cattle  darted  off  in  all  directions,  to 
the  right  and  left  of  the  road,  scampering  among  the 
bushes,  with  their  tails  in  the  air.  The  teams  followed 
them,  jolting  and  bouncing  the  wagons  over  the  hill- 
ocks and  rough  ground,  and  shaking  out  the  women 
and  children,  who  fell  screaming  and  terrified.  All 
along  the  line  were  confusion  and  dismay.  The  men 
yelled  at  their  cattle,  but  in  vain.  The  animals  ran 
like  mad  buffaloes,  and  careered  through  the  sage- 
brush pursued  by  their  drivers,  who  could  neither  stop 
nor  turn  them. 

The   ground  was   speedily  strewn  with  camp-stuff, 


IN  MORMONDOM  189 

loose  garments,  and  mining  ** traps."  Here  and  there, 
a  wagon  was  overturned,  and  the  frantic  oxen  dragged 
it  a  little  way  and  then  stopped  in  sullen  despair. 
Tige  and  Molly  joined  in  the  general  stampede,  and 
Arthur  and  Hi  breathlessly  pursued,  Barnard  having 
tumbled  out  of  the  rear  end  of  the  wagon,  where  he  had 
been  taking  a  nap.  As  Arty  caught  up  with  the  team 
and  ran  around  their  heads  to  turn  them  back,  he  sud- 
denly saw  a  dusky  figure  rise  up  from  behind  a  wild 
sage-bush,  within  a  few  feet  of  him.  He  felt  his  hair 
rising  on  his  head,  and  he  instinctively  reached  be- 
hind him  for  his  revolver.     It  was  gone! 

Just  then  the  figure  stumbled  and  fell,  rose  again, 
and  said: 

"I  just  allow  this  yere  is  the  ornerest,  toughest  piece 
of  ground  I  ever  travelled." 

It  was  Messer,  whose  team  had  disappeared  in  the 
struggling  mass  which  had  now  gathered  at  the  foot  of 
a  rise  of  ground.  Arty  breathed  freer,  and,  with  Mont's 
help,  he  and  Hi  quieted  their  oxen,  stopped  them,  and 
began  to  look  about. 

The  long  procession,  which  had  been  moving  along 
so  quietly  and  steadily  a  few  minutes  before,  was  now 
broken  and  scattered  in  all  directions.  Some  of  the 
loose  cattle  had  disappeared  in  the  darkness,  and  not 
a  few  wagons  lay  overturned  and  half-wrecked  among 
the  bushes.     People  went  wandering  around  seeking 


I90  THE   BOY   EMIGRANTS 

for  their  comrades  or  gathering  up  their  goods   and 
animals.     But  the  panic  was  over. 

"It  was  only  a  stampede,  after  all,  Arty,"  said  Hi, 
cheerily. 

"Well,  if  that's  a  stampede,  I  allow  I  don't  want 
any  more  of  'em,"  said  Tom,  with  his  teeth  still  chat- 
tering. "I  own  up  that  I  was  orful  scared.  Wha' — 
wha's  that?"  he  exclaimed,  starting  back  as  he  spoke. 

"Nothin',  nothin';  ye're  scart  of  yer  own  shadder," 
replied  Hi,  who  looked  in  the  direction  of  Tom's  fears, 
but  with  a  httle  shake  in  his  voice. 

It  was  only  Johnny,  who  was  hunting  about  in  the 
brush  for  Arty's  pistol. 

**Come  out  of  that  that  brush,  you  young  one,"  re- 
monstrated Hi,  with  some  asperity,  as  he  began  to 
straighten  out  the  team  before  driving  back  to  the  road. 
"'Spos'n'  yer'd  be  ketched  by  the  Goshoots,  who'd 
hev  yer  share  of  the  outfit,  I'd  like  to  know?  Haw 
there,  you  Tige!" 

"D'yer  'spose  there's  Injuns  about.  Hi?"  said 
Tom. 

"Couldn't  say — couldn't  say,  Tom.  Mont  here  al- 
lows that  Injuns  hev  a  way  of  stampedin'  a  train  like 
that  and  then  firing  into  the  crowd  and  pickin'  off  the 
heft  of  'em." 

"Yes,"  exclaimed  Mont,  "they  say  that  the  Indians 
would  sometimes  scare  cattle  and  make  them  stampede 


IN  MORMONDOM  191 

in  that  way,  and  then  fall  on  the  disordered  train  and 
destroy  the  people  and  capture  the  property.  But  we 
have  seen  no  Indians.  They  had  a  chance  to  attack 
us  just  now,  if  they  wanted  to." 

"Well,  then,  why  did  the  cattle  all  run  like  that?" 
demanded  Arthur.  "They  must  have  been  scared  by 
something." 

"I  just  allow  it  was  shadders.  The  cattle  were  skit- 
tish and  scary-like,"  said  Hi.  "And  I  must  say  I  was 
sorter  panicky  myself,  before  the  stampede  began. 
Shadders  creeping  alongside  of  the  road,  shadders  steal- 
ing along  behind  in  the  moonlight.  Ouch!  what's 
that?" 

Everybody  started,  and  then  everybody  laughed.  It 
was  Pete,  who  came  bounding  in  from  the  sage-brush 
with  Barney's  cap,  which  he  had  picked  up  somewhere. 
Barney  had  not  missed  his  cap — he  had  been  so  taken 
by  surprise  when  he  was  shaken  out  of  the  wagon. 
Arty  picked  up  his  pistol  near  where  the  stampede 
began,  and,  after  recovering  the  other  things  scattered 
along  the  path  of  their  erratic  flight,  they  went  back 
to  the  road.  Many  hands  make  light  work;  the  over- 
turned wagons  were  righted,  the  cattle  were  gathered 
in,  and  the  train  moved  on  once  more.  As  usual,  how- 
ever, the  panic-stricken  oxen  did  not  easily  recover 
their  calmness.  Once  again  in  the  course  of  the  night, 
terrified  by  the  weird  shadows,  perhaps,  they  bolted 


192  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

from  the  track;  but  they  were  soon  brought  back,  and 
they  plodded  on  until  daybreak. 

In  a  short  time  after  this  great  scare,  the  young 
emigrants  passed  into  Echo  Caiion,  then  a  famous 
resting-place  for  the  gold-seekers.  High  walls  of  red, 
yellow,  and  cream-colored  rock  rose  on  either  side. 
These  walls  were  topped  out  with  pinnacles,  towers, 
and  steeples.  It  was  like  a  fairy  scene.  Below  were 
charming  groves,  overshadowing  a  winding  stream. 
Above  were  fantastic  rocky  shapes,  resembling  castles, 
donjon-keeps,  cathedral  spires,  battlements,  and  mas- 
sive walls.  Trailing  vines  grew  in  the  high  crevices  of 
the  precipices  and  swung  in  the  breeze.  The  caiion 
was  rich  with  grass  and  wild  berries,  and  here  the  boys 
camped  for  several  days,  trying  curious  experiments  in 
cooking  the  fruit  which  grew  so  abundantly  about  them. 
"Sass,"  as  Hi  called  it,  was  the  easiest  to  manage. 
They  made  a  few  pies,  too;  but  the  pastry  was  made 
with  bacon  fat  and  lard,  and  Barnard  turned  up  his 
nose  at  it,  with  the  remark  that  "it  was  hog-meat  in 
another  shape." 

They  attempted  a  berry  pudding,  and  Nance  lent 
them  a  cloth  to  boil  it  in.  Arty  would  not  permit  the 
cover  of  the  camp-kettle  to  be  taken  off,  as  that  would 
**make  the  pudding  heavy."  Nance  had  said  so. 
When  the  hungry  company  gathered  about  the  kettle, 
at  dinner-time,  to  see  that  famous  pudding  taken  out, 


IN  MORMONDOM  193 

Arthur  poked  around  in  a  thin  purple  broth  with  his 
stick  only  to  fish  out  an  unpleasant-looking  and  limp 
cloth.  The  bag  had  been  tied  too  tight.  The  pud- 
ding had  burst,  and  was  now  a  porridge  of  flour,  water, 
and  "sarvice-berries." 

**I  allow  the  proof  of  that  pudd'n'  ain't  in  the  eatin' 
of  it,"  solemnly  remarked  Hi. 

But  Nance  consoled  Arty  by  informing  him  that 
this  was  an  accident  which  happened  to  the  very 
smartest  folks,  sometimes. 

"It  ain't  nigh  so  bad  as  scaldin'  yer  bread,  Arty,'* 
said  the  girl,  with  a  slight  laugh. 

When  they  reached  the  mouth  of  Emigrant  Canon, 
a  few  days  later,  one  fine  August  morning,  they  gazed 
with  admiration  upon  the  city  in  the  wilderness — ■ 
Great  Salt  Lake  City.  The  canon  opened  to  the  west, 
high  up  among  the  mountains.  Below  the  boys 
stretched  the  broad  valley  north  and  south.  Above 
their  heads  rose  snowy  peaks;  beneath  was  a  vast 
plain,  belted  with  winding  streams,  and  green  and  gold 
with  grass,  orchards,  and  grain-fields.  In  the  midst 
of  this  lovely  panorama  shone  the  City  of  the  Saints. 
It  was  like  a  fairy  city.  It  seemed  like  a  dream. 
Nearly  three  months  had  passed  since  they  had  seen 
a  town,  and  here  was  a  great,  well-built  and  beautiful 
city.  The  houses  were  neutral-tinted  or  whitewashed, 
the  roofs  were  red,  and  innumerable  trees  embowered 


194  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

the  whole.  The  plain,  in  the  midst  of  which  the  city 
was  set  like  a  jewel,  rolled  far  to  the  westward,  where 
it  was  bounded  by  the  shining  waters  of  Great  Salt 
Lake.  Beyond  this  towered  a  range  of  purple  moun- 
tains, their  sharp  peaks  laced  with  silvery  snow. 

"This  is  a  view  from  the  Delectable  Mountains!" 
murmured  Mont,  as  he  sat  down. 

"Putty  as  a  picter,"  said  honest  Hi,  leaning  on  his 
whip-stock,  and  gazing  at  the  wonderful  panorama. 
"But  it  reminds  me  of  the  hymn — 

*Where  every  prospect  pleases, 
And  only  man  is  vile.' 

They  do  say  them  Mormons  will  steal  like  all  possest." 
It  was  a  difficult  and  a  zigzag  road  down  the  moun- 
tain-side. Many  a  wrecked  emigrant-wagon  lay  by 
the  side  of  the  descent,  now  continually  crowded  with 
the  trains  of  the  gold-seekers.  At  one  place,  looking 
over  a  low  natural  parapet,  they  saw  a  wagon  and 
four  oxen,  lying  in  a  heap  of  ruins,  just  where  they 
had  fallen  from  the  dizzy  height  above.  So,  with 
much  trembling  and  anxiety,  they  crept  down  by  rocky 
slopes,  beetling  precipices,  and  foamy  mountain-tor- 
rents, and  reached  the  grassy  plain  at  last.  Here  was 
comfort — an  easy  road,  plenty  of  feed  and  water  for 
the  cattle,  and  fruit  and  vegetables  growing  in  the  neat 
farms  by  which  they  passed.     It  was  like  paradise. 


IN   MORMONDOM  195 

Driving  into  the  city,  which  was  only  a  huge  village, 
with  orchards  and  grain-fields  all  about,  they  were 
directed  to  an  open  square  where  emigrants  were  al- 
lowed to  camp.  Fresh  meat,  vegetables,  and  new 
flour  were  to  be  had  here,  and  in  these  unaccustomed 
luxuries  the  boys  reveled  with  great  delight.  It  seemed 
as  if  they  were  near  their  journey's  end.  The  mishaps, 
discomforts,  and  perils  through  which  they  had  passed, 
seemed  far  away  now.  Here  were  flower  gardens, 
people  living  in  houses,  and  here  were  families  abiding, 
not  camping  out  for  a  night.  The  tent  of  the  emi- 
grants, which  had  become  their  home,  almost  beloved 
as  such,  appeared  frail  and  shadowy  by  the  side  of 
these  substantial  and  comfortable  houses,  in  which 
people  actually  lived. 

"We  must  get  up  and  dust  out  of  this.  I'm  home- 
sick," was  Hi's  plaintive  remark. 

"Lor!"  said  Nance,  whose  family  was  on  the  spot 
when  they  drove  into  town.  "Lor!  the  wimmen  is 
orful  ornery.  So  old-fashioned,  you  can't  think! 
Nothin'  but  sun-bunnits  and  caliker  gownds.  I  ain't 
seen  a  sunshade  since  I've  bin  here.  Ugh!  such  a 
place,  I  want  to  git." 

The  boys  thought  that  they  never  could  "git,** 
when  they  woke  up  one  fine  morning,  and  found  their 
cattle  gone.  They  had  been  chained  to  the  wheels  of 
the  wagon  when  they  "turned  in"  to  sleep  the  night 


196  THE   BOY   EMIGRANTS 

before.  Mont  had  waked  in  the  night  and  heard 
Bally,  who  was  a  restless  creature,  chafing  with  his 
chain.     Now  they  were  gone! 

They  looked  in  blank  amazement,  wondering  how 
the  thieves  could  have  taken  them  away  without  dis- 
turbing anybody.  It  was  useless  to  look  for  tracks. 
The  turf  was  trodden  by  numerous  hoofs,  coming  and 
going. 

"Where's  that  rascal  Pete  that  he  didn't  bark?  If 
there  had  been  a  chipmunk  about  the  camp,  he'd  have 
wakened  up  everybody,"  stormed  Barnard,  with  great 
anger. 

"Sure  enough,  where's  Pete?"  asked  Arthur.  He 
was  not  to  be  seen.  The  boy  whistled  for  his  old 
friend,  but  had  no  response.     Pete  had  disappeared. 

This  was  a  great  calamity,  and,  leaving  the  younger 
ones  to  get  breakfast  and  watch  the  camp,  Mont,  Hi, 
and  Barnard  went  out  to  look  for  the  stolen  cattle. 
They  came  back,  late  in  the  morning,  one  after  another, 
without  tidings.  Everybody  had  told  them  that  the 
Mormons  would  steal  the  tires  off  the  wagon-wheels; 
that  it  was  more  dangerous  here  than  in  the  Indian 
country;  and  then,  there  were  dreadful  rumors  of 
emigrants — "Gentiles"  the  Mormons  called  them — 
disappearing  suddenly  and  never  being  heard  of  again. 
If  strangers  made  trouble  about  being  robbed,  they 
were  quietly  "put  out  of  the  way,"  nobody  knew  how. 


IN  MORMONDOM  197 

The  boys  looked  at  the  useless  yokes,  left  piled  on 
each  other  by  the  wagon,  thought  of  their  stolen  cattle, 
and  sat  down  to  a  very  gloomy  breakfast.  Sympathiz- 
ing friends  and  acquaintances  from  neighboring  camps 
came  in  with  offers  of  help,  but  they  could  not  give  up 
all  hope  of  finding  their  own  again.  Arty  confessed  to 
himself  that  he  rather  enjoyed  the  celebrity  which  the 
affair  gave  his  party,  though  he  was  not  pleased  when 
some  rough  stranger  laughed  at  "the  youngsters  who 
had  their  cattle  stolen  from  under  their  blankets  while 
they  slept."  And  next  day,  after  they  had  spent  one 
whole  day  in  hunting  for  their  stock,  they  heard  that 
another  party,  on  the  west  side  of  the  city,  had  been 
robbed  of  a  horse  and  three  yoke  of  cattle. 

Mont  went  to  a  Mormon  justice  of  the  peace  and 
stated  his  case.  He  was  received  with  great  grimness, 
and  a  constable  was  sent  down  to  the  camp.  This 
official  looked  at  the  wagon,  tent,  and  camp-stove, 
asked  if  they  had  any  tea  to  sell,  and  went  away. 
They  never  saw  him  again. 

On  the  third  day,  Mont,  Hi,  and  Arthur  were  prowl- 
ing about  on  the  outskirts  of  the  city,  where  the  settle- 
ment melted  away  into  small  farms.  The  boy  had 
strayed  away  from  his  companions,  and  was  attracted 
by  a  neat  little  cottage  built  of  adobe,  or  sun-dried 
brick.  The  roof  was  of  thatch,  and  in  the  trim  door- 
yard  bloomed  marigolds,  hollyhocks,  larkspur,  and  other 


198  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

old-fashioned  flowers.  A  cat  purred  in  the  sun,  and 
a  flock  of  white-haired  children  played  on  the  low 
door-step. 

"This  seems  like  home,"  murmured  the  poor,  dis- 
pirited and  lonesome  boy. 

A  sad-looking,  sallow-faced  woman,  coming  to  the 
door,  said:  *' Would  you  like  to  come  in  among  the 
posies,  my  lad?" 

"No,  I  thank  you,  ma'am,"  civilly  repHed  Arthur. 
"But  I  should  like  a  sprig  of  that  lavender,  if  you  can 
spare  it." 

As  the  boy  spoke  a  short,  sharp  bark,  strangely  like 
Pete's,  sounded  from  the  house.  He  heard  a  man's 
voice,  then  a  whine,  and,  as  the  woman  gave  him  the 
spray  of  lavender,  a  low-browed,  dark-faced  man  put 
his  head  out  of  the  window,  and  said: 

"What  are  you  tolling  these  tramps  about  the 
place  for?     Get  out  of  here!" 

■  Two  more  sad-looking  and  sallow-faced  women  now 
appeared  in  the  doorway,  and  Arthur  walked  away, 
half  angry,  but  murmuring  to  himself: 

"That  man's  a  Mormon!     Those  are  his  wives!" 

This  discovery  aroused  the  boy  from  his  gloomy 
thoughts,  and  his  curiosity  was  stirred  to  find  out  how 
a  man  with  at  least  three  wives  could  live.  Loitering 
down  a  lane  by  the  side  of  the  cottage,  he  passed  by 
a  neat  hedge  which   enclosed   a  paddock  behind  the 


IN  MORMONDOM  199 

house.  He  stooped  in  an  aimless  way  and  peered 
through  an  opening  in  the  bottom  of  the  hedge.  The 
enclosure  was  about  fifty  feet  long  and  twenty-five 
wide.  The  upper  end  was  bounded  by  a  paling  which 
separated  the  Mormon's  garden  from  the  paddock. 
The  lower  end  opened,  by  a  pair  of  bars,  covered  with 
cut  boughs,  on  a  common,  unenclosed  space.  In  the 
middle  of  this  cattle-yard,  quietly  chewing  their  cuds, 
were  eight  or  ten  cattle.  Among  them,  to  his  amaze- 
ment, Arthur  recognized  Tige,  Molly,  Star,  and  his 
mate. 

Scarcely  believing  his  eyes,  Arty  looked  once  more, 
and  then  bounded  away  across  the  fields  and  over  the 
ditches  to  find  Hi  and  Mont.  They  were  sitting  dis- 
consolately by  some  wild  raspberry  bushes,  making  a 
poor  pretence  of  picking  the  fruit,  when  Arty  rushed 
up,  his  eyes  sparkling,  his  face  all  in  a  glow,  and  his 
breath  coming  and  going  fast. 

"What  luck?"  exclaimed  Mont,  whose  quick  eye 
saw  that  something  had  happened. 

"Found  'em! — found  'em!"  panted  the  boy.  "The 
whole  lot  are  together  in  that  corral  with  the  hedge 
around  it!" 

"Gosh  all  Friday!"  said  Hi. 

The  three  boys  now  walked  rapidly  back  in  the 
direction  of  the  adobe  house,  which  was  about  a  mile 
off,  but  in  plain  sight.     Arriving  at  the  opening  in  the 


200  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

rear  of  the  paddock,  they  reconnoitered  through  the 
brush  which  had  been  ingeniously  twisted  into  the  bars 
so  that  the  hedge,  from  the  outside,  seemed  continuous. 

"There's  Tige,  and  Molly,  and  all  hands,"  whispered 
Hi,  with  glistening  eyes. 

"We've  two  pistols  among  us.  Let's  march  boldly 
in  and  drive  them  out,"  said  Mont. 

Without  a  word,  Hi  tore  out  the  screen  of  boughs, 
let  down  the  bars,  and  strode  in.  Just  then,  the  back- 
door of  the  house  opened  and  the  dark-faced  man 
appeared. 

"Get  out  of  that  corral,  or  I'll  shoot  you!"  he  cried, 
and  he  raised  a  fowling-piece  to  his  shoulder  as  he 
spoke. 

"Don't  be  afeard,  boys;  it  ain't  loaded!"  called  one 
of  the  sad-looking  women,  who  suddenly  came  around 
the  corner  of  the  house.  The  man  muttered  an  oath, 
and  pursued  her  as  she  disappeared  among  the  holly- 
hocks. 

The  boys  hastily  separated  their  cattle  from  the  rest, 
and  drove  them  down  the  paddock.  Just  then,  the 
man,  who  had  run  around  the  hedge,  appeared  at  the 
opening  and  began  to  put  up  the  bars. 

"Leave  those  cattle  alone,"  said  he,  savagely. 

"They're  our  cattle,  and  we  are  goin'  to  take  'em," 
was  Hi's  dogged  reply. 

The  man  went  on  putting  up  the  bars.     Then  Mont 


IN  MORMONDOM  201 

drew  his  pistol,  and,  pointing  it  directly  at  the  fellow's 
head,  said: 

"Put  down  those  bars,  or  I'll  shoot  you  !  Now  then: 
One  ! — two  ! — three  !" 

The  man  turned  and  fled. 

Arty  ran  down,  dropped  the  bars,  and  the  cattle 
passed  out.  The  opening  was  closed  behind  them, 
and  the  little  party,  triumphant,  but  not  without  fears, 
took  their  way  back  to  town.  They  were  received  at 
the  camp  with  great  acclamations,  Barnard  having 
returned  in  the  worst  possible  spirits.  The  neighbor- 
ing emigrants  gathered  in  to  congratulate  them  on 
their  good  luck,  as  well  as  their  pluck. 

"But  suppose  that  chap  takes  it  into  his  head  to 
come  down  on  us  with  legal  documents,  constables, 
and  things!"  said  Barnard. 

Captain  John  Rose  took  up  his  favorite  rifle,  which 
was  lying  in  the  sun,  and  remarked: 

"If  thar's  Mormons  enough  in  this  yere  city  to  cap- 
ture the  gang  of  Gentiles  lyin'  around  loose  in  this 
yere  square,  let  'em  come  on.  No  better  fun  than  that 
fur  me !" 

As  a  matter  of  precaution,  however,  it  was  thought 
best  to  get  out  of  town  as  soon  as  possible.  The  few 
necessary  purchases  had  been  made.  Letters  were 
written  home;  and,  yoking  up  their  recovered  team, 
they  hastily  departed  out  of  the  city. 


202  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

The  affair  had  been  noised  about,  and  several  Mor- 
mons came  around  them  as  they  drove  away,  threaten- 
ing dreadful  things.  The  dark-faced  man  did  not 
appear.  "If  he  wants  his  property,  let  him  come 
and  take  it,"  said  Hi.  Strange  to  say  he  did  not 
come.  The  emigrants  were  numerous,  lawless,  and 
angry. 

The  boys  drove  out  to  the  north  and  west,  their 
road  leading  them  by  a  cluster  of  boiling  hot  springs, 
across  the  Weber,  and  so  on  to  Box  Elder.  The  first 
part  of  their  way  was  through  broad  fields  thick  with 
grass  and  yellow  with  wild  flowers.  Across  these 
they  saw  the  City  of  the  Saints,  now  no  longer  attrac- 
tive, recede  as  they  drove  away.  Something  came 
bounding  toward  them  across  the  grassy  plain,  now 
lost  in  the  tall  growth,  and  now  springing  into  the 
streams  which  laced  the  plain.  It  seemed  an  animal, 
and  yet  it  appeared  like  a  man  running  on  all  fours 
with  marvellous  swiftness.  It  came  from  the  direc- 
tion of  an  adobe  house  on  the  edge  of  the  city,  in  the 
midst  of  the  fields.  As  it  leaped  nearer  and  nearer,  it 
gave  a  joyful  bark. 

"It's  Pete!  it's  Pete!"  cried  Arthur,  and  his  tears 
must  needs  flow.  In  another  instant,  Pete,  with  a 
ragged  rope  about  his  neck,  was  in  Arty's  arms,  on 
Hi's  back,  on  Barnard's  neck,  and  knocking  little 
Johnny  over  in  his  paroxysm  of  delight. 


IN    MORMONDOM  203 

"Whar  hev  yer  b'en,  ole  feller  ?"  asked  HI.  "What 
a  powerful  shame  it  is  that  yer  can't  talk !" 

"I  just  believe  that  the  man  who  stole  the  cattle 
took  Pete  away,"  said  Arthur.  *'I  was  sure  I  heard 
him  in  that  house.  He  heard  me  outside  talking  with 
the  woman,  and  he  barked." 

"But  how  could  he  get  Pete  away  without  poison- 
ing him?"  demanded  Mont. 

"Drugged  him,"  suggested  Hi. 

"There's  that  knowing  old  Tige,"  said  Arthur  play- 
fully. "He  looks  around  as  if  he  could  tell  all  about 
it." 

But  he  never  did. 


CHAPTER  XV 

A    GREAT  DISASTER 

After  leaving  Salt  Lake  Valley,  the  young  emi- 
grants passed  into  a  wild,  desolate,  and  barren  region. 
Immediately  outside  of  the  Mormon  settlements,  they 
found  a  most  miserable  country.  The  surface  of  the 
earth  was  red  and  dusty — "red  hot,"  Hi  said.  No 
grass  grew  except  in  small  dry  bunches,  and  the  pools 
of  water  were  thick  and  brown  with  alkaH,  or  they  were 
boihng  hot  with  hidden  fires.  Some  of  them  rushed 
out  of  their  fountains  with  a  hurrying  and  hissing 
noise  that  reminded  the  boys  of  a  steamboat.  Others 
were  bluish  pools  of  water,  with  clean  and  pebbly 
bottoms,  and  just  warm  enough  to  be  comfortable 
for  a  bath.  Into  these  the  weary  and  dusty  travelers 
plunged  themselves  with  great  content.  The  waters 
seemed  to  be  healing,  they  were  so  soft  and  pleasant 
to  joints  stiffened  by  long  marches,  and  to  skins  made 
rough  and  sore  by  many  days  of  travel  on  alkaH  plains. 
The  air  was  still  loaded  with  the  alkali  dust,  Hke  fine 
saleratus,  which  floated  everywhere.     But  the  natural 

hot   baths,   steel   blue   in   their   depths   and   gurgling 

204 


A  GREAT  DISASTER  205 

over  stones  covered  with  some  kind  of  white  mineral 
deposit,  were  luxurious  beyond  anything  they  had  ever 
dreamed  of. 

Some  of  these  hot  springs  were  so  near  the  cold  ones, 
that  the  boys  tried  experiments  of  dipping  their  hands 
into  a  pool  of  cold  water  while  their  feet  dabbled  in 
warm  water,  as  they  lay  along  the  ground.  Once  they 
came  to  a  huge  round  pool,  nearly  fifty  feet  across, 
black,  still,  and  with  neither  outlet  nor  inlet.  Yet  it 
was  not  stagnant;  a  slight  current  showed  that  there 
was  some  sort  of  movement  going  on  beneath  the  sur- 
face. 

"I  allow  this  yer  pool  runs  down  inter  the  bowels  of 
the  yearth,"  said  Philo  Dobbs,  pensively,  as  he  stood 
on  the  brink  and  gazed  into  the  mysterious  depths. 

"Well,  ain't  the  bowels  of  the  earth  deep  enough  to 
take  down  this  hull  pool  at  one  swaller,  if  so  be  as  it 
runs  down  so  fur  ?"  asked  Bush,  with  some  impatience. 
"Stands  to  reason  it  would  be  all  drawed  off  to  oncet, 
if  the  bottom  was  clean  dropped  out." 

"Anyway,  there  is  no  bottom,"  said  Arty.  "Lots 
of  people  have  sounded  it  and  found  none." 

But  Philo  Dobbs  was  firm  in  his  opinion  that  the 
pool  led  directly  into  the  centre  of  the  earth;  and 
Nance,  as  a  dutiful  daughter,  informed  the  boys  that 
what  her  father  did  not  know  about  such  things  was 
not  worth  knowing. 


2o6  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

They  passed  out  from  this  region  of  wonders  and 
traversed  an  exceedingly  dull  and  uninteresting  tract 
of  country,  lying  between  Salt  Lake  Valley  and  the 
headwaters  of  the  Humboldt  River. 

About  three  weeks'  march  from  the  Mormon  capital, 
late  in  August,  they  reached  the  Goose  Creek  Moun- 
tains. Here  good  pasturage  was  found  by  selecting 
spots  along  the  creek,  and  here,  too,  the  road  became 
more  easy  for  the  cattle,  many  of  which  were  weak 
and  sick  with  the  effects  of  alkali.  Passing  down 
through  Thousand  Spring  Valley,  the  emigrants  camped 
at  the  head  of  a  rocky  cafion,  one  night,  two  or  three 
companies  being  together.  The  ground  was  dotted 
with  scrubby  knots  of  wild  sage,  grease-weed,  and 
cactus.  The  soil  was  red,  gray,  and  pebbly;  but  a  small 
stream  slipped  through  a  gully  near  by,  and  along  its 
banks  grew  a  scanty  crop  of  grass,  well  browsed  off 
by  the  innumerable  cattle  which  had  passed  on  the 
way  to  California. 

*'This  is  awful  lonesome,"  sighed  Arty,  as  he  wearily 
went  through  the  usual  and  monotonous  task  of  getting 
supper. 

"Doesn't  pay,  does  it,  Arty?"  said  his  brother, 
curiously  watching  the  boy,  with  half-closed  eyes,  as  he 
turned  his  sizzling  bacon  in  the  frying-pan,  and  kept 
his  fire  going  with  handfuls  of  dry  weeds,  their  only 
fuel. 


A  GREAT  DISASTER  207 

"No,  Crogan,  it  does  not  pay.  Tm  getting  clean 
beat  out.  And  there's  poor  old  Pete,  licking  his  paws 
again.  I  can't  keep  shoes  on  that  dog's  feet,  and  he 
has  worn  the  skin  off  of  them  so  that  he  can  hardly 
walk.  Heigho !  I  wonder  what  mother  would  say  to 
this  mess?" — and  Arty,  with  great  disgust,  stirred  in 
the  flour  which  was  to  thicken  the  bacon  fat  and  make 
"dope"  to  eat  with  bread,  instead  of  butter. 

The  thought  of  what  his  mother  might  say  brought 
tears  to  the  boy's  eyes.  This  was  Saturday  night. 
Away  off  in  the  groves  of  the  valley  of  the  Rock  his 
mother  was  drawing  the  New  England  brown  bread  and 
beans  from  the  brick  oven.  His  father,  perhaps,  was 
sitting  by  the  fading  light  in  the  doorway,  looking 
westward  and  thinking  of  his  wandering  boys.  His 
brothers  were  out  at  the  well-curb,  dipping  their  heads 
into  the  water-trough  with  much  rough  play,  and  mak- 
ing ready  for  their  welcome  Sunday  rest. 

Here  was  a  wilderness,  a  desert,  scanty  fare,  and  with 
the  Land  of  Gold  still  a  long  way  off. 

"Hullo!  there's  a  drop  of  salt  water  running  down 
your  nose,  Arty,"  cried  Tom,  "and  if  it  drops  into 
that  dope,  you'll " 

But  Tom  never  finished  his  sentence,  for  at  that 
moment  Mont,  with  righteous  indignation,  knocked 
him  off  the  roll  of  blankets  on  which  he  had  been 
sitting. 


2o8  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"Yer  might  let  a  feller  know  when  you  was  a-comin' 
for  him,"  said  Tom,  wrathfully,  as  he  scrambled  out  of 
the  way, 

"Sarved  yer  right,  yer  grinnin'  chessie-cat,"  said  Hi. 

"Yer'll  never  keep  yer  mouth  shut.  Now  hustle 
that  that  cofFee-pot  onto  the  table,  and  we'll  sit  by," 

"Tom,  I  beg  yer  pardon,"  spoke  up  Mont  Morse. 
"I  really  didn't  intend  to  knock  you  over,  only  just  to 
give  you  a  gentle  poke  by  way  of  reminder." 

Tom  sullenly  ate  his  supper,  without  any  comment 
on  his  brother's  remark  that  he  was  an  "ornery  blath- 
erskite, anyway." 

Somehow  the  evening  was  more  gloomy  and  cheer- 
less than  usual;  and,  as  it  was  now  necessary  to  keep  a 
sharp  watch  for  thieves  who  were  prowling  about  the 
trail,  those  who  were  to  go  out  on  the  second  watch 
went  early  to  their  blankets.  The  rest  took  their 
several  stations  about  the  edge  of  the  camp. 

It  was  a  little  past  midnight  when  the  sleeping  boys 
were  awakened  by  a  shot,  and  the  voice  of  John  Rose 
crying,  "Stop  that  man!" 

Barnard  broke  out  of  the  tent  with  a  wild  rush, 
cocking  his  pistol  as  he  ran  through  the  low  brush  in 
which  the  camp  was  set.  In  the  cloudy  night  he  saw 
a  light  sorrel  horse  running  close  by  the  side  of  Old 
Jim,  and  coming  toward  him.  As  the  horses  passed 
swiftly  across  his  vision,  he  saw  a  man  rise  and  fall, 


A  GREAT  DISASTER  209 

and  rise  and  fall  again  in  the  sage-brush — rise  and  fall 
and  disappear  in  the  darkness. 

Pursuing  him  was  John  Rose,  his  tall  figure  and 
bright  red  shirt  showing  conspicuously  in  the  gloom. 
Barney  ran  on,  but  the  fugitive  was  gone,  and  Rose 
came  back,  excitedly  saying: 

"Dog  on  that  chap!  I  just  beheve  I  winged  him. 
Did  you  see  him  limp  ?" 

Barney  was  not  sure  that  he  limped,  but  was  burning 
to  know  what  it  was  all  about. 

"I  was  sittin'  behind  that  thar  rock,"  said  Rose, 
*' a-wondering  about  them  stars  just  peekin'  out  of  the 
clouds,  when  I  heern  a  cracklin'  in  the  bush  and  if 
thar  wa'n't  a  yaller  boss — a  strange  boss — sidlin'  up, 
queer-like,  as  if  somebody  was  leadin'  him.  I  seen 
no  man,  no  lariat  onto  the  boss,  when  he  gets  up  along- 
side of  Old  Jim.  Then  he  stops  short,  and  then  I  seen 
a  man's  legs  on  the  off-side  and  just  in  range  of  the 
sorrel's.  I  slid  down  from  behind  the  rock  and  crep' 
along  on  the  ground  like,  holding  my  rifle  steady, 
when,  all  at  once,  the  chap  jumps  up  on  the  sorrel  and 
away  he  kited  pullin'  Old  Jim  after  him." 

"Yes!   yes!    and  you  fired  then?" 

"Fired!  Well,  I  just  allow  I  did,  and  you  should 
have  seen  that  chap  drop.  But  he  got  away,  and  we 
have  got  his  boss — that's  all." 

Sure  enough,  the  sorrel  horse  was  found  to  have  a 


2IO  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

lariat,  or  halter,  of  twisted  raw-hide  about  his  neck, 
one  end  of  which  had  been  knotted  into  Jim's  halter. 
There  was  great  excitement  in  the  camp  as  the  emi- 
grants woke  and  came  out  to  see  "what  was  up." 
Here  was  the  evidence  of  horse-thieves  being  about, 
and  the  men  expressed  themselves  as  being  in  favor 
of  hanging  the  rascal — if  he  could  be  caught. 

*'Ouch!"  cried  Barney  suddenly,  sitting  down. 
**  Bring  a  light,  Johnny." 

Barney's  bare  feet  were  filled  with  the  prickly  spines 
of  the  ground  cactus. 

"Strange  I  never  felt  them  until  just  now,  and  I 
must  have  clipped  it  through  that  whole  bed  of  cactus 
plants." 

But  he  felt  them  now,  and,  what  was  more,  he  was 
lame  for  a  week  afterward. 

Next  morning,  on  examining  the  ground,  the  boys 
discovered  the  tracks  of  the  strange  horse,  where, 
coming  up  to  the  regular  trail  from  the  north,  they 
crossed  a  damp  patch  of  alkali  earth,  breaking  in  the 
crust  which  forms  on  top  when  the  heat  of  the  sun 
evaporates  the  alkali  water.  Nearer  the  camps  the 
tracks  were  lost  in  the  confused  beating  of  the  feet  of 
many  passing  animals.  But  in  the  sage-brush,  where 
Captain  Rose  had  fired  at  the  horse-thief,  the  foot- 
prints were  plainly  seen. 

In  the  loose  sandy  soil  beyond  were  the  tracks  of  a 


A  GREAT  DISASTER  211 

man,  left  in  the  dry  surface;  and  on  the  twigs  of  a  low 
grease-wood  bush  they  saw  a  few  drops  of  blood. 

"Yes,  yes,  he  was  wounded.  I  was  sure  of  that," 
cried  Rose. 

**And  here  is  where  he  limped,"  said  Hi,  dropping 
on  his  knees  and  examining  the  foot-prints  in  the  light 
gray  soil.  "Come  yere,  Mont,  and  tell  us  what  you 
think  of  these  yere.  See !  that's  a  print  set  squar' 
down;  then  here's  one  that's  only  light-like,  just  half 
made." 

Mont  got  down  on  his  knees  and  followed  the  tracks 
along.  The  man  had  fled  in  great  haste.  Sometimes 
he  had  gone  over  the  bushes,  sometimes  he  had  Hghted 
in  the  midst  of  one.  But,  here  and  there,  was  a  print, 
sometimes  of  the  right  foot,  sometimes  of  the  left;  but 
one  was  always  lightly  made — "half-made,"  as  Hi 
said. 

"That  man  limped,  sure  enough,"  said  Mont,  finally. 
"But  I  guess  he  didn't  limp  from  a  wound,  though  he 
may  have  been  wounded.  I  should  say  that  he  had  a 
game  leg." 

"A  game  leg!"  repeated  Johnny  and  Arty  together. 

"I  allow  you're  right,  Monty,  my  boy,"  said  Hi,  who 
had  been  stooping  again  over  the  mysterious  foot- 
prints.    "That  that  man  had  a  game  leg,  for  sure." 

"Which  leg  was  Bill  Bunce  lame  of,  Johnny.?"  de- 
manded Barnard. 


212  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"The  left  leg,"  replied  the  lad. 

Arty  looked  up  triumphantly  from  the  ground  and 
exclaimed : 

**So  was  this  man  that  tried  to  steal  Old  Jim." 

"It  was  Bill  Bunce!  It  was  Bill  Bunce !  I'm  sure 
it  was,"  cried  little  Johnny,  in  great  excitement. 

He  looked  at  the  foot-prints  of  the  fugitive  horse- 
thief,  and  fairly  trembled  with  apprehension;  he  could 
not  have  told  why. 

"0  !  sho  !"  said  Hi.  "You  mustn't  think  that  every 
game-legged  man  you  meet  on  the  plains  is  Bill  Bunce. 
Why,  thar  was  that  feller  that  picked  up  Barney's 
boots  when  they  fell  out  of  the  wagon,  down  at  Pilot 
Springs.  He  wa'n't  no  Bill  Bunce,  and  he  was  the 
game-leggedest  man  I  ever  seen." 

"If  he  had  not  been  too  game-legged  to  wear  those 
boots,  I  am  not  so  sure  that  Crogan  would  have  seen 
them  again,"  laughed  Mont. 

"Well,  boys,  that's  nothin'  more  to  be  I'arned  of 
them  foot-prints,"  said  Hi,  "We  may  as  well  get 
breakfast  and  be  off." 

"But  this  is  Sunday,"  said  Barnard. 

"Yes,"  replied  Hi,  "Sunday  and  no  feed  and  no 
water.  Camp  here  all  day  and  starve  the  critters  .? 
Not  much." 

"But  we  have  never  travelled  Sundays,"  remon- 
strated Mont. 


A  GREAT   DISASTER  213 

"Oh,  yes,  we  did,  Mont,"  interposed  Arty.  "Once 
before,  at  Stony  Point,  you  know  we  had  to  when 
there  was  no  grass;  and  we  travelled  from  the  Salt 
Lick  to  Deep  Creek  on  Sunday,  because  we  had  no 
water." 

"Which  is  the  Christianest,  Mont, — to  let  the  cattle 
go  without  feed,  or  travel  Sunday?"  asked  Hi. 

"I  don't  know.     I  give  up  that  conundrum." 

"So  do  I,"  said  Hi,  with  a  grin. 

They  went  on,  however.  Leaving  Thousand  Spring 
Valley,  and  crossing  several  rocky  ridges,  they  de- 
scended and  entered  a  long,  narrow  canon,  through 
which  flowed  a  considerable  stream. 

Precipitous  walls  of  rock  rose  up  on  either  side, 
leaving  barely  room  for  the  narrow  wagon-trail  and 
the  creek.  The  trail  crossed  and  recrossed  the  stream 
many  times,  and  the  fording-places  were  not  all  safe 
or  convenient.  But  the  day  was  bright  and  pleasant, 
and  high,  high  above  their  heads,  above  the  beetling 
crags,  the  blue  sky  looked  cool  and  tender. 

A  long  train  passed  down  the  canon,  the  procession 
being  strung  out  with  numerous  companies  of  emi- 
grants. They  had  got  half-way  through  the  passage, 
which  was  several  miles  long,  when,  late  in  the  after- 
noon, the  sky  grew  overcast,  and  thick  clouds  gathered 
suddenly  in  the  west. 

"An  awkward  place  to  get  caught  in  a  shower,"  mut- 


214  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

tered  Captain  Wise.  "Thar's  poor  crossing  at  the 
best  of  times,  and  if  this  yere  creek  should  rise,  we'd 
be  cut  off  in  the  midst  of  the  canon." 

"But  there  is  no  danger  of  that,  John,  is  there?" 
said  Mont,  who  was  striding  along  with  the  captain. 

"Couldn't  say,  Mont.  These  yere  creeks  do  swell 
up  dreffle  sudd'n,  sometimes."  And  he  anxiously  re- 
garded the  sky,  from  which  a  heavy  shower  now  began 
to  fall. 

The  boys  lightly  laughed  at  the  discomfort.  They 
were  used  to  it,  and,  wrapping  their  heavy  coats  about 
their  shoulders,  they  plodded  on  in  the  pouring  rain. 

It  was  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  and  the  shower 
increased  with  such  force  that  Hi,  who  was  behind 
with  the  team,  shouted  to  Captain  Wise: 

"Say,  hadn't  we  better  lay  by  ?  Yere's  a  place  whar 
we  can  turn  in  and  let  the  others  pass  us." 

"The  cattle's  necks  are  getting  chafed  with  their 
yokes,"  cried  Tom,  who  particularly  disliked  getting  wet. 

"We  must  drive  on  until  we're  out  of  this  yere 
canon,"  was  the  captain's  only  reply. 

And  they  pressed  on  in  the  midst  of  a  tempest  of 
rain.  The  sky  overhead  was  only  a  narrow  patch  be- 
tween the  frowning  walls  of  the  canon.  It  was  as 
black  as  ink. 

They  had  now  reached  a  sharp  bend  in  the  cafion;  a 
huge  elbow  in  the  rocky  precipice  at  the  left  of  the 


A  GREAT  DISASTER  215 

track  came  down  and  made  a  deep  recess  just  beyond 
it,  where  the  trail  turned  in  to  the  left.  On  the  right 
was  the  creek,  now  foaming  along  in  its  stony  bed, 
and  on  the  opposite  side  was  a  sheer  wall  of  rock  rising 
into  the  low-hung  clouds. 

As  they  struggled  around  the  corner  of  the  rock  and 
entered  a  little  elevated  place,  where  the  canon  widened, 
the  tall  angle  behind  them  shut  out  the  trail  down 
which  they  had  just  passed.  Arthur,  hearing  a  strange 
whirring  noise  in  the  air,  looked  back  and  up  the 
canon.  He  saw  an  inky  black  mass,  tremendous  and 
tumbling  over  and  over,  drift  helplessly  over  the  wall 
of  the  caiion,  like  a  huge  balloon.  It  struck  the  opposite 
wall,  and  in  an  instant  the  solid  rock  seemed  to  burst 
in  cataracts  of  water. 

Suddenly  the  air  was  filled  with  a  portentous  roar. 
The  rain  no  longer  fell  in  sheets,  but  in  solid  masses. 
The  creek,  black  except  where  it  was  lashed  into  foam, 
rose  like  a  mighty  river  and  tore  down  the  caiion, 
hoarsely  howling  on  its  way.  The  sides  of  the  narrow 
pass  seemed  to  melt  into  dropping  streams  of  water. 
The  trail  disappeared,  and  along  the  foaming  tide 
rushed  wagons,  horses,  oxen,  men,  and  the  floating 
wrecks  of  trains  which  had  been  farther  up  the  caiion. 

The  angry  flood,  checked  by  the  sharp  angle  of  rock 
around  which  the  boys  had  just  passed,  roared  in  a  solid 
wall  over  that  part  of  the  trail,  then  spread  out  and 


2i6  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

curled  hissing,  up  to  the  Httle  eminence  on  which  the 
party,  with  scared  faces,  stood  as  if  spell-bound.  The 
loose  cattle  of  the  Rose  drove  were  in  the  rear.  They 
were  swept  off  like  insects.  Then  the  flood,  as  if  hold- 
ing on  by  its  claws  at  the  rocky  angle  behind,  backed 
up  and  backed  up,  until,  with  one  mighty  effort,  it 
swept  the  wagon-bodies  off  their  beds,  overturned  the 
cattle  in  their  yokes,  and  then  slunk  off  down  the  caiion, 
and  slowly  fell  away. 

Captain  Rose,  climbing  a  wrecked  wagon,  in  the 
midst  of  the  still  falling  rain,  looked  about  anxiously, 
gave  a  great  sob,  and  said: 

"I'm  a  ruined  man;  but,  thank  God,  we're  all  here !" 

The  angry  current  yet  fled  down  the  cafion,  making 
the  trail  impassable.  But  the  worst  was  over.  They 
were  all  alive.  Even  Pete,  to  whom  Arty  had  clung 
in  the  extremity  of  his  terror,  was  safe  and  sound. 
All  were  drenched,  and  it  was  only  by  clinging  to  the 
half-floating  wagons  that  they  had  been  saved  from 
drowning.  But  the  yoke  cattle  were  here.  So  was 
poor  old  Jim,  and  a  few  of  Rose's  loose  cattle,  as  well 
as  his  horses. 

**What  was  that?"  asked  Tom,  his  teeth  chatter- 
ing with  fear  and  cold. 

"A  cloud-burst,"  said  Mont,  solemnly.  "And  it  will 
be  a  wonderful  thing  if  hundreds  of  people  in  this 
cafion  are  not  drowned  by  it." 


A  GREAT  DISASTER  217 

More  than  an  hour  passed  before  the  creek  had  fallen 
enough  to  permit  the  emigrants  to  pass  down  the 
trail.  But  the  caiion  was  free  of  the  flood  in  an  aston- 
ishingly short  time.  Before  dark  the  little  party, 
gathering  up  their  wet  goods  and  straightening  out 
their  teams,  ventured  down  the  trail. 

The  alders  were  crowded  with  fragments  of  wreck. 
Wagon-covers,  clothing,  and  bits  of  small  household 
stuff  were  hanging  from  rocks  and  brush.  The  trail 
was  washed  out  by  the  flood,  and  along  it  were  strewn 
the  bodies  of  drowned  animals.  For  the  most  part, 
however,  the  wrecks  had  been  swept  clean  out  of  the 
caiion,  and  were  now  lying  on  the  sandy  plain  beyond. 

Nobody  ever  knew  how  many  lives  were  lost  in  that 
memorable  cloud-burst.  They  were  many.  The  boy 
emigrants  passed  out  and  camped  on  the  fast-drying 
plain  at  the  mouth  of  the  caiion,  where  they  found 
Philo  Dobbs,  his  wife,  and  Nance.  They,  with  Messer, 
had  laid  by  outside  before  the  storm  came  up,  having 
been  one  day's  travel  ahead  of  our  boys. 

Rose  had  lost  sixty  head  of  cattle,  a  few  of  those  first 
missing  having  been  picked  up  afterward. 

"Where's  yer  yaller  boss  .?"  asked  Hi  of  Barney. 

The  sorrel  horse  was  gone. 

"Light  come,  light  go,"  said  Hi,  sententiously. 


CHAPTER  XVI 

IN   THE    DESERT 

It  was  early  in  September  when  the  young  emigrants 
reached  the  headwaters  of  the  Humboldt.  Here  the 
road  led  by  the  side  of  the  stream,  which  flowed  through 
a  narrow  valley.  Outside  of  this  valley  the  country 
was  a  tumultuous  mass  of  rocks,  mountains,  and  sand. 
No  tree  nor  shrub  relieved  the  prospect  anywhere.  It 
was  an  utterly  desolate  and  trackless  desert.  Close  by 
the  stream,  whose  bluish-white  waters  were  shaded  by 
willows,  there  was  a  plenty  of  grass,  and  the  water  was 
at  least  fit  to  drink.  So  the  party  journeyed  on  blithely, 
forgetful  of  the  dangers  behind,  and  careless  of  the  pri- 
vations before  or  behind  them. 

Occasionally  the  road  left  the  river  and  crossed  over 
a  rough  ridge  of  hills,  for  ten  or  twelve  miles,  and  then, 
having  made  a  straight  line  across  a  curve  of  the  stream, 
struck  it  again  farther  down.  But,  after  about  two 
weeks  of  travel,  with  some  days  of  rest,  orders  went 
out  to  cut  grass  for  the  long  stretch  of  desert  which 
was  now  to  be  traversed.  Knives  of  all  sorts  were 
brought  out  and  sharpened,  and  the  emigrants  spent 

2lS 


IN  THE   DESERT  219 

one  afternoon  in  cutting  and  binding  up  the  lush, 
coarse  grass  which  grew  plentifully  in  the  meadows. 
Not  far  from  this  point  the  Humboldt  spreads  out  in  a 
boggy  lake,  overgrown  with  reeds  and  bulrushes,  and 
is  lost  in  the  desert.  About  the  edges  of  this  strange 
swamp  the  whole  surface  of  the  earth  is  dry  and  parched. 
The  spreading  river  seems  discouraged  by  the  barren 
waste  before  it,  and  it  sinks  away  in  the  sands  and  is 
gone. 

"This  everlasting  sage-brush!"  murmured  Arty,  as 
the  party  left  the  verdure  of  the  Humboldt  meadows 
and  struck  once  more  into  the  arid  plain,  where  the 
only  vegetation  was  the  yellow-brown  sage-brush  or 
the  whity-yellow  grease-weed.  ''This  everlasting  sage- 
brush !    How  sick  I  am  of  it." 

"Oh,  well,  don't  speak  ill  of  the  sage-brush,  Arty," 
said  Mont,  pleasantly.  "Besides,  it  is  called  artemisia, 
which  is  a  much  nicer  name;  and  if  it  was  not  for  the 
artemisia,  otherwise  sage-brush,  I  don't  know  what  you 
would  do  for  fuel." 

"That's  so,  Mont,"  added  Hi.  "And  though  I  don't 
know  much  about  your  arty-what-d'ye-call-it,  I  allow 
it's  put  here  for  some  good  end.  See,  that  thar  sage- 
stalk  is  nigh  as  thick  as  my  leg,  and  good  fire-wood 
it  is.  Howsoever  it  gets  to  grow  in  this  sand  gets  me, 
I  must  say.  Still  I  shall  be  glad  when  we  are  shut  of 
it.    Hit's  a  sure  sign  of  desert  wherever  it  grows." 


220  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

It  was  an  abominable  country.  The  face  of  the  earth 
was  undulating,  but  gradually  rising  as  the  trail  ran 
westward,  and  was  covered  with  loose  black,  yellow, 
and  red  bowlders,  and  split  masses  of  rock.  The  wagon- 
trail  was  almost  knee-deep  with  dust,  and  was  sprinkled 
with  broken  stones,  over  which  the  wagons  jolted  dis- 
mally. Beyond,  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach,  and  dis- 
appearing over  the  swales  of  the  surface,  stretched  a 
long,  long  line  of  teams,  over  which  a  pillar  of  dust  con- 
tinually rose  into  the  hot  air.  The  sun  poured  down 
its  fiercest  beams,  and  the  far-off  hills  to  the  north 
looked  as  if  they  were  calcined  by  the  terrible  heat, 
and  ashes  seemed  to  cover  their  glowing  sides. 

After  a  long  and  weary  tramp  the  boys  reached 
Antelope  Springs,  a  place  whose  name  had  such  a 
pleasant  sound  to  them  that  they  had  longed  for  it 
very  much.  It  was  a  bitter  disappointment.  Hun- 
dreds of  teams  were  already  there  before  them,  and 
the  two  feeble  little  springs  which  had  gushed  out 
from  under  a  ledge  of  rocks  in  this  dryness  were  tram- 
pled and  choked  with  mud.  The  water  which  trickled 
down  from  these  pools  was  not  fit  to  drink;  even  the 
suffering  cattle  would  not  touch  it.  After  waiting 
several  hours  and  taking  up  a  spoonful  of  water  at  a 
time,  the  boys  secured  enough  to  make  some  coffee — ■ 
the  first  nourishment  they  had  had  since  morning;  and 
it  was  now  nearly  sundown. 


IN  THE   DESERT  221 

Rabbit-hole  Springs,  twenty  miles  off,  must  be 
reached  before  any  water  for  the  cattle  and  horses 
could  be  found.  It  was  a  day's  drive  in  the  best  of 
times.    Now  they  must  make  it  in  one  night. 

The  poor  animals,  hungry  and  thirsty,  could  hardly 
drag  the  wagons  over  the  rough  roads;  and  the  boys, 
faint,  foot-sore  and  sleepy,  stumbled  along  in  the  dark, 
ready  to  fall  down  and  sleep  forever  in  the  rocky  way. 
As  the  night  wore  on  the  air  grew  cool,  and  they  toiled 
up  and  down  the  steep  ridges  with  some  sense  of  relief. 

During  the  night,  while  sweeping  down  a  mountain- 
side, the  party  suddenly  blundered  into  the  midst  of 
the  encampment  of  a  large  company  of  emigrants. 
These  people  were  evidently  tired  out  with  their 
march;  not  one  of  them  was  to  be  seen.  Their  cattle 
were  scattered  about  in  all  directions,  and  their  tents 
were  silent  as  the  grave.  Into  this  tranquil  settlement 
suddenly  burst  the  train  of  the  Roses,  the  young  em- 
igrants, and  several  others  who  had  "bunched"  to- 
gether while  crossing  the  desert.  In  a  twinkling  the 
loose  animals  rushed  to  the  right  and  left  among  the 
tents  and  wagons,  startled  by  the  unexpected  sight  or 
searching  for  something  to  eat. 

The  confusion  was  instant  and  dire.  Men  rushed 
out  of  their  tents  or  from  under  their  wagons,  half- 
dressed  and  panic-stricken.  Their  alarm  changed  to 
rage  when  they  saw  the  cause  of  the  midnight  invasion; 


222  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

and  they  tried  in  vain  to  stop  the  bewildered  cattle, 
which  charged  on  the  tents,  tore  down  the  canvas,  and 
hungrily  grabbed  at  anything  eatable  and  in  reach. 
Old  Jim  snatched  a  huge  bundle  of  grass  in  his  teeth, 
and  bore  it  off  triumphantly,  never  heeding  the  stones 
and  yells  flung  after  him. 

Men  shouted,  women  screamed,  children  bawled, 
dogs  barked,  and  cattle  bellowed.  The  surprise  was 
complete,  and  the  stampede  perfect.  It  took  a  long 
time  to  straighten  out  the  trains,  separate  the  cattle, 
and  pacify  the  strangers,  who  returned  to  their  dis- 
mantled tents  in  a  very  unhappy  frame  of  mind. 

"Shouldn't  hev  camped  right  on  the  trail  if  ye  didn't 
want  to  git  up  and  dust  in  the  middle  of  the  night," 
was  Bush's  remark  as  he  collected  his  small  equipage 
of  cow  and  cart  and  went  swinging  down  into  the  val- 
ley, with  as  much  self-complacency  as  if  he  had  com- 
manded the  whole  train. 

The  night  grew  cooler,  and  when  the  caravan  reached 
the  long,  sandy  plain  which  now  stretched  out  toward 
Rabbit-hole  Springs,  Arty  wrapped  his  blanket  about 
his  shoulders  and  journeyed  out  into  the  mysterious 
star-lighted  waste,  accompanied  only  by  his  faithful 
Pete.  The  road  was  heavy  with  loose  sand,  but  not 
difficult  to  walk  in,  and  the  boy  soon  passed  out  of  all 
sight  and  hearing  of  the  teams  behind  him.  He  was 
alone  in  a  sea  of  sand,  the  dog  keeping  close  behind  at 


IN  THE  DESERT  223 

his  heels.  The  sky,  spangled  with  stars,  bent  over 
him,  and  far  off  the  dim  horizon  shaded  away  into  the 
gloom  of  the  distant  hills.  Arthur  fancied  himself  a 
lost  traveler,  far  from  human  habitation  or  human 
trace,  and  he  pressed  on  against  the  rising  breeze  with 
a  keen  sense  of  the  novel  loneliness  of  his  condition. 
The  cries  of  the  ox-drivers  and  the  crush  of  wheels  had 
died  away  in  the  distance,  and  only  when  Pete,  terrified 
at  the  unearthly  stillness,  came  up  from  behind,  whined 
for  a  word  of  recognition  and  dropped  back  to  his 
place,  did  the  lad  hear  any  sound  that  reminded  him 
that  he  was  in  the  land  of  the  Hving. 

Reaching  a  drift  of  sand,  where  the  wind  had  curled 
up  a  wave  in  the  shape  of  a  furrow,  Arty  wrapped  his 
blanket  about  him  and  lay  down  and  gazed  out  on  the 
lonely  desert  waste,  with  a  strange  sort  of  fascination. 
Pete  whimpered  at  this  unusual  proceeding.  He 
seemed  anxious  and  disturbed  by  the  strange  influ- 
ence of  the  night;  and  he  crept  under  the  boy's  blanket 
and  snuggled  up  close,  as  if  for  companionship. 

Presently,  while  Arty  was  dreamily  looking  off  into 
the  gloom,  and  wondering  why  he  was  not  sleepy,  the 
dog  growled  uneasily. 

"Oh,  keep  still,  Pete!  One  would  suppose  you  saw 
a  ghost." 

But  the  dog,  thus  reproved,  was  silent  only  for  a 
moment.     He  growled   again  with  more  positiveness. 


224  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

and  Arty,  straining  his  ear,  caught  no  sound  coming 
out  of  the  mysterious  shadows. 

"What  a  fool  I  was  to  come  out  here  alone,"  he 
muttered.  "Keep  still,  Pete,  can't  you?  But  there 
are  no  Indians  on  this  desert,  I'm  sure;  nothing  for 
'em  to  eat.    Wild  animals,  perhaps!" 

And  here  Pete,  who  could  endure  it  no  longer, 
bounced  out  from  under  the  blanket,  where  he  had  been 
growling  and  grumbling  to  himself,  and  barked  loud, 
long,  and  without  restraint. 

The  boy  hushed  him  for  a  moment,  when  a  faint  cry 
of  "Hallo  !  Arty  !"  came  out  of  the  darkness.  It  was 
Mont's  voice,  and  Pete  bounded  off  to  meet  him. 

"Gracious!  how  you  scared  me,  Mont!"  said  Arty, 
as  his  comrade  came  up.     "What  are  you  ahead  for  .f"' 

"Well,  you  see.  Hi  is  driving.  Barney  Crogan  is 
asleep  in  the  wagon,  and  Tom  is  riding  with  Nance's 
folks.  So  I  got  lonesome  and  came  on  ahead  to  find 
you.     Nice  night." 

"Yes,  but  how  strange  it  is!  See  those  stars.  That's 
Orion,  you  know.  My  mother  showed  me  that  con- 
stellation ever  so  many  years  ago;  and,  do  you  know,  I 
was  just  thinking  how  queer  it  is  that  all  those  stars 
should  shine  over  us  here,  away  off  in  the  desert,  just 
as  they  used  to  at  Sugar  Grove;  just  as  they  used  to 
shine  in  Vermont,  I  suppose — but  I  don't  remember 
much  about  that." 


IN  THE  DESERT  225 

The  young  man  made  no  answer,  but  sat  down  by 
Arty's  side,  clasped  his  hands  over  his  knees,  and  looked 
out  into  the  shadowy  plain.  The  boy  was  silent  again, 
the  dog  curled  up  and  slept  at  his  feet,  and  Mont 
thought  of  the  stars  shining  over  his  New  England 
home,  far  away.  He  saw  the  gable  windows  of  his 
mother's  house  gleaming  in  the  moonlight,  the  bronzed 
elms  that  made  dark  shadows  over  the  lanes  of  the 
suburban  town  where  his  old  home  was,  and  the  silvery 
river  that  rushed  under  the  bridge  with  wooden  piers, 
which  he  had  crossed  so  often.  Around  him  stretched 
a  trackless,  uninhabitable  waste.  It  was  as  silent  as 
the  tomb.  Out  of  its  depths  came  no  sound;  only  the 
chill  night  wind  whispered  over  the  sand-dunes  and 
among  the  pebbles  lying  in  the  dark  hollows  of  this 
sea  of  sand. 

Suddenly,  as  he  mused,  out  in  the  vague  mystery 
of  the  plain  he  heard  the  boom  of  a  deep-toned 
bell — once,  twice,  thrice,  four  times  sounding  on  the 
air. 

"The  bell !  the  bell !"  he  shouted  and  started  to  his 
feet.     Pete  barked  in  sympathy. 

"Golly!  what  bell?"  asked  Arty. 

"The  nine  o'clock  bell  at  Cambridgeport !  At  least, 
I  thought  I  heard  it  just  then!"  He  added:  "Good 
heavens!  Am  I  mad? — or  dreaming?"  Then  he 
laughed  confusedly,  and  said:  "Well,  I  must  have  been 


226  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

in  a  waking  dream.  Don't  mind  it.  Here  comes  the 
train." 

And,  as  he  spoke,  the  teams  came,  slowly  grinding 
their  way  through  the  darkness  of  the  night. 

The  waning  moon  had  faded  away  in  the  early  gray 
of  the  morning  before  the  tired  emigrants  reached 
Rabbit-hole  Springs.  It  was  a  queer  place.  A  dry, 
smooth  hill,  rounded  and  baked,  bore  on  its  topmost 
curve  a  cluster  of  wells.  These  were  dug  by  emigrants, 
and  they  reached  a  vein  of  water  which  kept  these 
square  holes  always  supplied.  Rude  steps  were  cut 
in  the  sides  of  the  pits,  and,  cautiously  creeping  down 
them,  the  precious  water  was  dipped  up  plentifully. 
No  matter  how  many  were  filled,  the  supply  never  gave 
out. 

Here  the  party  drank  and  gave  to  their  beasts. 
Then,  filling  all  available  vessels,  they  went  on  to  the 
plain  below,  where,  at  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  they 
halted  long  enough  to  get  ready  a  meagre  breakfast. 
The  air  began  to  grow  warm  again  as  the  wind  fell, 
and  Arty,  stupefied  with  fatigue  and  sleeplessness, 
stumbled  about  his  camp-stove  in  a  daze.  Everybody 
but  himself  had  dropped  in  the  dust  to  sleep.  He  was 
alone,  although  a  thousand  people  were  camped  all 
about  on  the  sandy  plain. 

There  was  no  fuel  but  dry  grease-weed,  and  his  hands 
were  in  the  dough. 


IN  THE  DESERT  227 

"Get  up  and  get  something  to  burn,  you  Crogan," 
he  said  crossly,  kicking  his  sleeping  brother's  shins  as 
he  lay  under  the  wagon. 

"Yes,  mother,"  drawled  the  young  fellow  in  his 
dreams;  "I'm  coming — coming,"  and  he  was  asleep 
again. 

Half  crying  with  vexation,  Arty  sat  down  on  the 
wagon-tongue  and  shouted  out,  in  the  most  general 
way:  "If  some  of  you  fellows  don't  wake  up  and  get 
some  firing,  you'll  have  no  breakfast,  so  now!" 

Nobody  stirred;  but  Nance,  gingerly  picking  her 
way  over  the  pebbly  ground,  barefooted  and  dusty, 
came  up  and  said: 

"I'll  help  ye,  Arty.  Take  yer  hands  out  o'  that 
dough  and  get  yer  fire-wood,  and  I'll  finish  yer  bread. 
Salt  ?     Bakin'  powder  ?    Now  git." 

"Nancy,  you're  the  best  girl  I  ever  knew,"  said 
Arty. 

"That's  what  she  is,"  interposed  Johnny,  who  was 
now  sitting  up  in  the  sand.    "Did  you  call,  Arty?'* 

"Lie  down  again  and  nap  it  while  you  can,"  said 
Arty,  his  anger  all  gone.  "You've  a  long  tramp  before 
you  to-day,  my  little  man." 

Only  two  hours  were  allowed  for  breakfast,  and  then 
the  weary  march  began  again.  One  of  Rose's  men — a 
tall,  gangling  young  fellow,  known  in  the  camp  as 
"Shanghai" — threw  up  his  contract  and  determined  to 


228  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"get  out  and  walk."  He  declared  that  he  had  been 
"put  upon"  long  enough.  He  had  not  been  provided 
with  the  cattle-whip  which  had  been  promised  him. 
He  had  been  compelled  to  drive  loose  cattle  in  the 
fearful  dust  of  the  day  before,  while  some  more  favored 
person  was  allowed  to  drive  the  steers.  To  crown  all, 
he  had  had  but  one  spoonful  of  "dope"  at  break- 
fast that  day.  This  was  too  much.  He  would  go  on 
alone. 

Van  Orman,  a  stoHd,  black-bearded  man,  one  of 
Rose's  teamsters,  who  had  very  profound  views  on  the 
subject  of  earthquakes  and  volcanoes,  and  who  never, 
under  any  circumstances,  could  get  enough  to  eat, 
listened  to  poor  Shanghai's  tearful  complaints,  threw 
down  his  whip,  and  said: 

"Hang  it!    Shanghai,  I'll  go  with  ye!" 

And  these  two  pilgrims,  packing  all  their  worldly 
effects  in  one  small  bundle,  took  their  way  over  the 
arid  hills  toward  the  Golden  Land. 

At  noon  the  long  caravan,  passing  over  a  succession 
of  rocky  and  dusty  ridges,  reached  the  last  one,  from 
which  they  gazed  off  into  the  great  plain.  It  was 
Hke  a  vast  sea.  Far  to  the  westward,  a  chain  of  sharp, 
needle-Hke  peaks  towered  up  to  the  sky.  Northward, 
a  range  of  hills,  flaming  in  red  and  blue,  looked  as  if 
they  were  masses  of  hot  iron.  South,  the  undulating 
level  melted  into  the  brassy  sky.     Across  the  dusky 


IN  THE   DESERT  229 

waste  a  long  line  of  wagons  travelled,  far  below  the 
point  on  which  the  boy  emigrants  paused  before  they 
began  their  descent. 

Looking  toward  the  red-hot  hills,  and  over  the  plain 
tremulous  with  heated  air,  Arthur  saw,  to  his  intense 
surprise,  a  crooked,  shining  line  of  blue.  It  glided  out 
and  in  among  clumps  of  willows,  and  rippled  in  the 
sunshine.  It  was  a  creek,  a  considerable  stream,  and, 
even  from  this  distance,  he  could  almost  hear  the 
gurgle  of  the  blessed  water. 

"Water!   water!"  he  cried,  almost  with  tears. 

Everybody  gazed.  Even  the  sullen  cattle  sniffed  it 
with  their  noses,  and  poor  Tige  set  up  a  disconsolate 
bellow  as  he  looked. 

"Only  a  mirage,  Arty,"  said  Mont,  with  a  tinge  of 
despondency.     "See  it  pass?" 

And,  as  he  spoke,  the  trees  faded  away,  the  blue 
waters  sunk  into  the  earth,  and  only  the  parched  rocks 
and  hills  remained.  Then,  moving  down,  the  delusion 
seemed  to  envelop  the  caravans  below.  The  wagons 
grew  and  grew  until  they  appeared  to  be  fifteen  or 
twenty  feet  high.  Then  these  spectral  figures  broke 
in  two,  and  on  each  wagon  was  the  shape  of  another, 
bottom  up  and  its  wheels  in  the  air.  Then  on  this 
ghostly  figure  was  another  wagon,  its  wheels  resting 
on  the  wheels  of  that  below.  This  weird  procession 
lasted  a  moment,  shuddered,  and  melted  away  like  a 


230  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

dream.  Only  the  commonplace  caravan  plodded  its 
weary  way  through  the  powdery  dust. 

At  sunset,  after  a  second  distressing  day's  drive,  the 
travelers  reached  the  range  of  peaks  which,  like  an 
Island,  divided  the  desert  into  two  parts.  Here  was 
water,  so  hot  that  an  egg  might  have  been  boiled  in 
it.  Tige,  who  was  on  the  sick  list,  put  his  black  muzzle 
into  it,  and,  astonished  at  the  phenomenon,  set  off  on 
a  brisk  run  with  his  tail  in  the  air. 

"Poor  old  chap !  He  has  not  got  all  his  wits  about 
him,  now  that  he  is  sick,"  said  Mont,  compassionately. 

Even  when  the  water  was  cooled  in  pails,  the  cattle 
distrusted  it,  and  hesitated  to  taste  it.  The  boys 
stewed  beans,  baked  biscuit,  and  made  coffee,  using  a 
portion  of  the  scanty  stock  of  fuel  brought  a  long  way 
for  this  very  purpose;  for  here  not  even  grease-weed 
nor  the  tiniest  blade  of  grass  ever  grew.  The  surface 
of  the  ground  was  utterly  bare. 

A  little  withered  grass,  brought  from  the  Humboldt, 
remained  in  the  wagons,  and  was  distributed  among  the 
cattle.  Tige  refused  to  eat  it,  and  as  the  boys  sat  in 
the  door  of  their  tent,  eating  their  desert  fare,  the 
docile  animal  came  up,  and,  resting  his  nose  on  Arty's 
shoulder,  looked,  winking,  into  his  tin  plate  of  stewed 
beans. 

*'  Have  some,  Tige  .? "  said  Arty.  "  Poor  old  Tige,  he's 
off  his  grub." 


IN  THE  DESERT  231 

And  the  steer,  cautiously  sniffing  at  the  plate,  put 
out  his  tongue,  tasted  with  apparent  satisfaction,  and 
licked  up  the  whole. 

"Now,  /  call  that  extravagance !"  said  Tom,  ladling 
out  another  plateful  of  beans. 

"And  /  call  it  genewine  humanity.  That's  what 
it  is,  Mister  Smarty,"  rejoined  Hi.  "Whatever  else 
we  haven't  got,  I  allow  we've  beans  enough  to  get  us 
through  with." 

At  sundown  onward  went  the  emigrants,  as  if  pur- 
sued by  some  hidden  enemy.  Out  into  the  desert 
swept  the  great  train  of  wagons,  cattle,  men,  and  wo- 
men— out  into  the  desert,  with  the  tall  and  motion- 
less peaks  of  purple  towering  above  them  into  the 
evening  sky,  now  flushed  and  rosy.  How  they  tramped 
on  and  on,  like  a  caravan  of  life,  out  into  an  unknown 
world,  rich  and  poor,  young  and  old  together !  Leav- 
ing behind  them  their  homes,  and  leaving  by  the  way 
their  dead,  they  swept  past  the  islanded  mountains, 
and  so  pressed  on  to  the  West. 

When  the  night  came  on,  and  the  yellow  moon 
flooded  the  vast  level  plain  with  liquid  light,  the  sight 
was  very  strange.  The  air  was  cool,  the  ground  white 
with  a  firm  sand  which  scarcely  yielded  to  the  easily 
running  wheels.  In  the  weird  lustre  that  covered  the 
plain,  a  lame  steer,  turned  out  to  die,  and  standing 
away  oflF  from  the  trail,  loomed  up  like  a  giraffe.    Look- 


232  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

ing  back,  the  long  train  seemed  to  rise  up  and  melt 
away  into  the  air;  and  forward,  the  blue-black  moun- 
tains that  bounded  the  plain  were  flecked  with  silver 
where  the  moonlight  fell  on  quartz  ledges  and  patches 
of  belated  snow. 

Occasionally  a  cry  from  the  rear  told  that  another 
"critter"  had  fallen,  and  some  one  must  be  detailed  to 
bring  it  along,  if  possible.  But  the  train  rolled  on  until 
the  camp-fires  of  Granite  Creek  shone  on  the  desert. 
At  two  o'clock  in  the  morning,  inexpressibly  weary, 
the  emigrants  reached  a  slightly  raised  plateau  at  the 
foot  of  another  range  of  mountains.  Without  waiting 
to  examine  the  ground,  which  was  a  rough  plain  bor- 
dering on  a  creek,  the  boys  put  up  their  tent,  unyoked 
the  cattle,  which  were  too  tired  to  stray,  dropped  into 
their  blankets,  and  slept  until  long  after  the  next  day's 
sunrise. 

Many  of  the  cattle  brought  here,  after  the  drive 
across  the  Great  Plains,  were  left  to  die.  The  boys 
rested  one  day,  and,  when  another  night  came  on,  they 
yoked  their  unwilling  oxen,  and  were  off  again.  It 
was  sunset  when  they  passed  southward  around  the 
spur  of  mountains  which  lay  across  their  path.  And 
it  was  four  o'clock  on  the  following  morning  when 
they  paused  and  built  another  camp-fire  in  the  midst 
of  the  last  stretch  of  desert,  on  the  western  side  of  the 
range.     Here   was   a   level,   floor-like  plain,   and   the 


IN  THE  DESERT  233 

tents  pitched  with  the  flaps  rolled  up  gave  the  scene 
an  Oriental  air.  No  Arabian  coffee  in  the  desert  was 
ever  more  delicious  than  that  which  our  weary  young 
pilgrims  drank.  And  no  dehcacies  of  a  luxurious  city 
could  have  been  more  welcome  to  these  wandering  sons 
than  the  well-browned  biscuits  which  Arty's  deft  hands 
drew  from  their  camp-oven. 

The  last  day's  travel  was  the  hardest  of  all.  Cattle 
dropped  by  the  wayside.  Strong  men  fainted  with 
fatigue,  or  grew  delirious  with  sleeplessness.  In  some 
of  the  companies  there  was  real  want,  and  strange 
rumors  of  a  plot  to  rob  the  better-provided  ones  floated 
back  and  forth  among  the  trains,  now  moving  once 
more  in  single  file  over  the  bleak  and  barren  hills.  No 
vegetation  met  the  eye,  no  insect  or  bird  cried  in  the 
joyless  air;  a  fierce  sun  poured  down  its  rays  upon  the 
struggling  line.  Here  and  there,  a  grave,  newly  made 
and  rudely  marked,  showed  where  some  poor  pilgrim 
had  fallen  by  the  way.  The  very  sky  seemed  to  add 
to  the  utter  desolation  of  the  land. 

But,  at  sunset,  the  young  emigrants,  after  fording  a 
salt  creek,  climbed  the  rocky  ridge  which  separated 
the  desert  from  the  fertile  region  known  as  the  Smoke 
Creek  country.  The  train  toiled  on  and  passed  over 
the  divide.  Arthur  and  Mont  paused  and  looked  back. 
The  setting  sun  bathed  the  plain  below  them  in  golden 
radiance.     A  flood  of  yellow  sunshine  gushed  over  the 


234  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

arid  waste,  and  broke  in  masses  among  the  violet 
shadows  of  the  mountain  range  beyond.  Eastward, 
the  rocky  pinnacles,  glorified  with  purple,  gold,  and 
crimson,  pierced  a  sky  rosy  and  flecked  with  yellow. 
It  was  like  a  glimpse  of  fairy-land. 

Arty  held  his  breath  as  he  gazed,  and  forgot  his 
fatigue  for  a  moment. 

"It  is  as  beautiful  as  a  dream,"  said  the  boy. 

"And  as  cruel  as  death,"  added  Mont. 

"I  shall  never  forget  it,  Mont." 

"Nor  I." 


CHAPTER  XVII 

THE    GOLDEN    LAND 

"Poor  old  Tige!  We  may  as  well  take  him  out  of 
the  yoke." 

The  plucky  little  ox  would  have  dragged  on  with  his 
mate  Molly  until  he  dropped.  But  he  was  too  sick  to 
travel.  The  boys  were  now  near  Honey  Lake  Valley, 
where  feed  was  good  and  water  plenty.  They  had 
crossed  the  last  considerable  ridge,  or  divide,  before 
reaching  the  Sierra;  a  few  days  more  would  bring  them 
to  their  journey's  end. 

The  faithful  beast  had  pulled  steadily  through  the 
awful  desert  and  over  the  volcanic  region  which  lay 
between  that  region  and  the  Honey  Lake  country. 
As  Johnny  and  Arthur  unfastened  the  yoke  to  let  the 
invalid  Tige  go  free,  the  creature  looked  around  in 
wonder,  as  if  to  ask  the  reason  of  this  unwonted  pro- 
ceeding. 

"Tige,  my  boy,"  said  Arthur,  **I  am  afraid  you 
won't  wear  the  yoke  again." 

"Is  he  so  bad  as  that,  Arty?"  asked  Johnny,  sym- 
pathetically, and  almost  with  tears. 

"Well,    you    see,    Johnny,"    interposed     Barnard, 

235 


236  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"there  is  very  little  chance  for  a  critter  that's  alkalied 
ever  to  get  well.  That  dose  of  melted  fat  we  gave  him 
yesterday  didn't  do  him  one  bit  of  good.  Hi  says  that 
he  allows  that  his  milt  is  all  eaten  through  with  alkali. 
Whatever  the  milt  may  be  I  don't  know;  do  you, 
Mont?" 

"Diaphragm,  I  guess,"  said  Mont. 

"Dyer  what?"  asked  Tom.  "Dyer — well,  that's  a 
good  one.  I  tell  you  it's  the  milt.  Don't  you  know 
what  the  milt  is  ?" 

"Give  it  up,"  said  Barney,  shortly.  "Hurrah,  there's 
the  Sierra !" 

And  as  he  spoke,  their  team,  drawn  now  by  one 
yoke,  rounded  the  ragged  summit  of  the  ridge,  and 
they  beheld  the  Sierra  Nevada. 

Below  was  a  winding  valley,  dotted  with  isolated 
lofty  pines,  and  bright  with  green  grass.  A  blue 
stream  rambled  about  the  vale  and  emptied  into  a 
muddy-looking  lake  at  the  south.  This  was  Honey 
Lake,  and  the  stream  was  Susan's  River.  Beyond, 
westward,  was  a  vast  wall,  bristling  with  trees  and 
crowned  with  white  peaks.  It  was  the  Snowy  Range 
of  mountains.     Beyond  it  was  the  promised  land. 

The  boys  gazed  with  delight  on  the  emerald  valley 
and  the  sparkling  river;  but  chiefly  were  they  fascinated 
by  the  majestic  mountains  beyond  these.  They  were 
not  near  enough   to  see  the  smaller  features   of  the 


THE  GOLDEN  LAND  237 

range.  But  their  eyes  at  last  beheld  the  boundary 
that  shut  them  out  of  the  Land  of  Gold.  The  pale 
green  of  the  lower  hills  faded  into  a  purple-blue,  which 
marked  where  the  heavy  growth  of  pines  began. 
Above  this,  and  broken  with  many  a  densely  shadowed 
gulch  and  ravine,  rose  the  higher  Sierra,  bald  and 
rocky  in  places,  and  shading  off  into  a  tender  blue 
where  the  tallest  peaks,  laced  with  snow,  were  sharply 
cut  against  the  sky. 

Before  the  young  emigrants  were  water,  rest,  and 
pasturage.  But  beyond  were  the  mysterious  fastnesses 
in  which  men,  while  they  gazed,  were  unlocking  the 
golden  secrets  of  the  earth.  Up  there,  in  those  vague 
blue  shadows,  where  the  mountain-torrents  have  their 
birth,  miners  were  rending  the  soil,  breaking  the  rocks, 
and  searching  for  hidden  treasure.  The  boys  pressed 
on. 

But  two  days  passed  before  the  emigrants,  with 
their  single  yoke  of  cattle,  and  often  delayed  by  swamps 
and  by  getting  on  false  trails,  reached  the  base  of  the 
Sierra.  It  was  now  late  in  September,  and  the  nights 
were  cool.  While  on  the  high  ridges  west  of  the  Great 
Desert,  they  had  had  a  touch  of  cold  weather.  Ice  had 
formed  outside  of  the  tent  on  more  than  one  night; 
and,  inside,  the  boys  had  shivered  under  their  blankets 
and  buffalo  skins,  though  the  days  were  hot.  But  here 
was  fuel  in  plenty. 


238  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

Here,  too,  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains,  they  found 
a  ranch,  or  farm,  the  tiller  of  which  had  steadily  re- 
fused to  be  charmed  away  by  tales  of  gold  discoveries 
on  the  other  side  of  the  wall  of  mountains. 

He  leaned  on  his  rail  fence  and  eyed  the  vast  pro- 
cession of  emigrants  with  a  cynical  air.  The  boys 
almost  envied  him  the  possession  of  such  a  trim  little 
farm;  for,  though  it  was  really  rude  and  straggling,  it 
looked  like  a  home,  a  haven  of  rest,  after  their  long 
march  in  the  desert  and  wilderness.  They  felt,  for 
the  first  time,  that  they  were  ragged,  uncouth,  toil- 
stained,  and  vagabondish  in  appearance.  Here  was  a 
man  wearing  a  white  shirt,  or  it  was  once  white;  and 
a  woman  stood  in  the  doorway,  with  knitting-work  in 
her  hands.  It  was  a  domestic  picture,  and  in  sharp 
contrast  to  emigrant  life  on  the  plains. 

*'0h,  you're  bound  to  the  gold-diggin's,  you  be?" 
he  said,  with  an  unpleasant  leer.  "Wal,  now,  I've 
heerd  that  men  were  makin'  wages  over  there — day 
wages  just — and  flour  at  twenty  dollars  a  hundred. 
But  boys — wal,  now,  this  gets  me !  Boys  ?  No  wages 
yonder  for  boys,  you  jest  bet  your  life !" 

"Don't  you  worry  yourself,  old  man,"  retorted  Hi, 
who  always  did  the  rude  badinage  of  the  party.  "We'll 
come  back  next  week  and  buy  out  your  shebang,  boys 
or  no  boys,  wages  or  no  wages." 

"Got  any  vegetables  to  sell  V  asked  Barney,  civilly. 


THE  GOLDEN  LAND  239 

"Vegetables!  Stranger,  look  a-there!"  said  the 
ranchero,  pointing  to  a  patch  of  ground  well  dug  over. 
"D'ye  see  that  there  patch?  Wal,  that  there  patch 
was  full  of  corn  and  taters.  Corn  don't  do  well  here; 
too  cold  and  short  seasons.  But  this  year  them  crazy 
critters  that  hev  been  pilin'  over  the  mountains  hev 
carried  off  every  stalk  and  blade  and  ear.  What  they 
didn't  beg,  they  stole;  and  what  wasn't  growed  was 
carried  off  half-growed." 

"Stole  your  crop  ?" 

"That's  about  the  size  of  it.  I'm  from  Michigan,  I 
am,  and  was  brought  up  regular;  but  I  jest  laid  out  in 
that  corn-field  nights,  with  a  double-barrel  shot-gun, 
untel  there  wa'n't  no  corn  for  me  to  hide  in.  Stole  ? 
Why,  them  pesky  gold-hunters  would  hev  carried  the 
ground  away  from  under  my  feet,  if  they'd  a-wanted 
it.     Smart  fellers,  they  be!" 

"Why  don't  you  go  on  and  try  your  luck  in  the 
mines?"  asked  Barnard,  who,  with  Mont  and  Arty, 
had  lingered  behind,  hoping  that  they  might  buy  a 
few  fresh  vegetables. 

"So  far  as  I've  heerd  tell,  there's  no  luck  there.  Here 
and  there  a  chunk,  but  nothin'  stiddy.  The  mines  hev 
gi'n  out;  they've  been  givin'  out  ever  since  they  was 
struck,  and  now  they've  gi'n  out  clean." 

"And  are  you  going  to  stay  here  and  farm  it  ?"  asked 
Barney. 


240  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"Young  feller" — and  here  the  rough-faced  ranchero 
put  on  a  most  sagacious  air — "ranchin'  here  is  better 
than  gold-diggin'  over  yender.  Here  I  stay.  That 
there's  my  wife,  Susan;  that's  Susan's  River  yender,  and 
this  here's  Susanville,  now  hear  me." 

"And  you  find  farming  profitable,  although  the  emi- 
grants steal  your  crop  ?" 

"Wal,  young  feller,"  he  said  to  Mont,  "you're  a  sort 
of  civil-spoken  chap;  seein'  it's  you,  I'll  sell  you  a  few 
taters  for  a  dollar  a  pound." 

The  boys  bought  two  pounds  of  potatoes  and  went 
on,  alarmed  at  their  first  great  extravagance. 

"Never  mind,"  said  Rose,  when  they  told  him  of 
their  purchase.  "You'll  have  no  more  chance  to  buy 
potatoes  after  this.  Reckon  you  might  as  well  get 
yer  fust  and  last  taste  of  'em  now." 

Camping  at  night  in  the  forests  of  the  Sierra  was 
like  being  in  paradise.  No  more  sand,  no  more  sage- 
brush, no  more  brackish  or  hot  water  in  the  rivulets. 
Gigantic  pines  stretched  far  up  into  the  star-lighted 
sky.  Ice-cold  streams  danced  over  the  mountain-side. 
The  cattle  lay  down  to  rest  in  nooks  carpeted  with  lush 
grass.  The  boys  built  a  tremendous  fire  in  the  midst 
of  their  camp,  piling  on  the  abundant  fuel  in  very 
wantonness,  as  they  remembered  how  lately  they 
were  obliged  to  economize  handfuls  of  dry  grass  and 
weeds  in  their  little  camp-stove. 


THE  GOLDEN  LAND  241 

This  was  luxury  and  comfort  unspeakable;  and  as 
they  basked  in  the  cheerful  light  and  heat,  Hi  said: 

"I  allow  I'd  just  as  soon  stay  here  forever.  The  gold 
mines  are  a  fool  to  this  place." 

Barney  poked  the  glowing  fire,  which  was  kindled 
against  a  mighty  half-dead  pine,  and  said: 

"Who  votes  this  is  a  good  place  to  stay  in  ?" 

There  was  a  chorus  of  laughing  "Fs"  about  the  fire 
as  the  boys  lounged  in  every  comfortable  attitude 
possible.  At  that,  there  was  a  horrible  roar  from  the 
pine-tree  by  the  fire,  and  from  the  midst  of  the  curl- 
ing flames  suddenly  appeared  a  huge  creature,  which 
bounded  through  the  blaze,  scattered  the  brands, 
broke  up  the  circle  of  loungers,  who  fled  in  all  direc- 
tions, knocked  over  little  Johnny,  and  disappeared 
down  the  side  of  the  mountain,  with  a  savage 
growl. 

The  boys  stared  at  each  other  in  blank  amazement, 
and  with  some  terror. 

"An  elephant!" 

"A  tiger!" 

"A  catamount !" 

"A  grizzly  bear !" 

It  was  a  bear !  I  felt  his  fur  as  he  scrabbled  over 
me!"  said  Johnny  with  a  scared  face  and  his  teeth 
chattering. 

Just  then  there  was  a  shot  down  the  mountain  in  the 


242  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

direction  in  which  the  monster  had  gone  crashing 
through  the  under-brush.  Then  another,  and  another 
shot  sounded.  Everybody  ran.  They  came  up  with 
two  or  three  men  from  a  neighboring  camp,  running 
in  the  same  direction.  Reaching  a  Httle  hollow  in  the 
wood,  they  found  two  emigrants  examining  a  confused 
dark  heap  on  the  ground. 

"What  is  it?"  cried  the  new-comers. 

"A  b'ar,"  said  one  the  men,  taking  out  his  knife 
and  making  ready  to  skin  the  animal.  "Heerd  him 
crashin'  through  the  brush  and  let  him  have  it." 

"A  grizzly?"  asked  Tom. 

"No,  a  cinnamon,  I  allow,"  said  the  other  man, 
striking  a  light  for  his  pipe,  before  he  began  to  help  his 
comrade. 

Johnny,  who  had  not  quite  recovered  from  his  fright, 
looked  at  the  bronzed  face  of  the  emigrant,  illuminated 
as  it  was  for  a  moment  by  the  flaming  match,  and  ex- 
claimed: 

"BillBunce!" 

"Hello!  my  little  kid,"  said  the  fellow  uncon- 
cernedly.    "WharVe  yer  bin  this  long  back?" 

Johnny  was  too  much  astonished  to  reply,  and  Mont, 
with  some  severity  of  manner,  said: 

"This  is  the  boy  you  abandoned  on  the  Mississippi 
River,  is  it  not,  Bunce?" 

"Well,  now,  stranger,  I  allow  you  are  too  many  for 


THE  GOLDEN  LAND  243 

me.  My  understandin'  was  that  he  throwed  off  on 
me.  Say,  pard,"  he  continued,  addressing  his  mate, 
"just  yank  him  over  on  his  back.  There  now,  this 
skin's  wuth  savin'.  He's  fat,  he  is;  must  weigh  nigh 
onto  three  hundred." 

The  boys  went  back  to  their  camp-fire  very  discon- 
tentedly. After  all,  there  was  nothing  to  be  done. 
They  might  have  accused  Bunce  of  attempting  to 
steal  Old  Jim. 

"Well,  we've  got  our  baked  potatoes,  anyhow," 
grumbled  Barney,  as  he  raked  two  dollars*  worth  of 
that  useful  vegetable  out  of  the  ashes. 

Later,  while  they  were  debating  as  to  what  they 
might  demand  of  Bill  Bunce,  when  they  should  see 
him  again,  the  comrade  of  that  mysterious  person  ap- 
peared by  the  camp-fire  with  a  huge  bear-steak. 

"With  Mr.  Bunce's  compliments,"  he  said,  with  a 
grin.  "It  was  your  bear-like,  as  it  mought  be;  came 
outen  your  back-log,"  and  the  stranger  disappeared. 

"Cheeky,"  said  Barney. 

"Now,  a  b'ar-steak  is  not  to  be  sneezed  at.  We'll 
have  a  jaw  with  that  Bunce  feller  to-morrow,"  said 
Hi,  surveying  the  welcome  fresh  meat  with  great 
gratification. 

But  next  day  when  the  boys  awoke  at  sunrise,  and 
surveyed  the  neighboring  camping-grounds,  no  trace 
of  Bill  Bunce's  party  was  to  be  found.    They  had  "lit 


244  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

out"  early  in  the  dawning,  a  good-natured  emigrant 
informed  them. 

On  the  second  day  after  this  adventure,  the  party 
reached  a  narrow  ridge,  the  summit  of  the  gap  in  the 
Sierra  over  which  they  were  passing.  They  had  toiled 
up  a  steep  incline,  winding  among  rocks  and  forests. 
Before  them  was  a  descent  too  steep  for  any  team  to 
be  driven  down  it.  Yet  the  road  pitched  down  this 
tremendous  incline,  and  they  saw  the  tracks  of  wagons 
that  had  just  gone  on  ahead. 

"See  here,"  said  Mont,  who  had  been  spying  about. 
"Here  are  marks  on  the  trees,  as  if  ropes  had  been 
slipped  around  them.  They  have  let  the  wagons  down 
this  inclined  plane  by  ropes." 

"But  where  are  the  ropes  for  us  .?  And  how  do  they 
get  the  cattle  down  .?    SHde  them  .''"  asked  Barney. 

"I  don't  know  where  our  ropes  are  to  be  got,"  re- 
plied Morse.  "But  you  can  see  the  tracks  of  the  cattle 
in  the  under-brush.  They  have  been  driven  down  that 
way. 

Here  was  a  dilemma.  They  could  hardly  urge  the 
cattle  up  the  steep  slope  on  the  eastern  side.  There 
was  not  room  enough  for  two  teams  to  stand  on  top, 
and  westward  the  ridge  dropped  away  sharply,  like 
the  smooth  roof  of  a  house,  for  several  hundred  feet. 

"Oh,  here  comes  the  Knight  of  the  Rueful  Counte- 
nance !"  said  Mont.    "He  has  a  coil  of  rope."    And  the 


THE  GOLDEN  LAND  245 

sad-faced  Messer  came  urging  his  cattle  up  the  hill. 
The  situation  was  explained  to  him. 

"Yes,  I  allow  I've  heerd  tell  of  this  yere  place,"  he 
said,  "and  powerful  bad  sleddin'  hit  is.  Now,  how 
d'yer  allow  to  get  down  ?" 

Barnard  explained  to  him  how  other  people  must 
have  gone  down.  The  rope  was  produced  from  Messer's 
wagon,  one  end  made  fast  to  the  hinder  axle  of  a  wagon. 
Then  a  turn  was  taken  about  a  tree,  and  some  of  the 
party  carefully  steadied  the  vehicle  down  the  hill, 
while  the  others  held  the  rope  taut,  and  let  it  slip 
around  the  tree-trunk,  as  the  wagon  slid  slowly  down. 
The  oxen  and  loose  cattle  were  driven  over  by  a  round- 
about way  through  the  brush.  Poor  old  Tige  at  once 
lay  down  on  reaching  the  valley  below,  and  Arthur 
almost  wept  as  the  sick  creature  staggered  to  his  feet 
and  struggled  on  after  the  train,  when  they  had  crossed 
the  divide  and  yoked  up  on  the  western  side  of  the 
range. 

Passing  through  "Devil's  Corral,"  a  curious,  huge 
bowl  of  rocks,  set  up  like  a  gigantic  wall  about  a  grassy 
hollow,  the  party  camped  on  the  margin  of  a  magnifi- 
cent meadow.  Here  was  a  flat  valley,  filled  with  springs 
and  rank  with  grass  and  herbage.  A  pure  stream 
circled  about  its  edge,  and,  like  a  wall,  a  growth  of 
tall  pines  and  firs  shut  it  in  all  about.  The  forest 
which  sloped  down  to  this  enchanted  spot  was  aromatic 


246  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

with  gums  and  resin,  and  multitudes  of  strange  birds 
filled  the  air. 

In  this  lavish  plenty,  the  boys  camped  for  two  days, 
in  order  that  the  tired  cattle  might  be  rested.  It 
seemed  as  if  the  abundant  grass  and  sparkling  water 
might  restore  Tige's  health,  if  anything  could.  Arty 
carefully  tended  the  poor  beast.  But  he  was  filled  with 
forebodings,  and,  rising  early  in  the  morning  after 
their  first  night  in  the  valley,  went  out  to  look  after 
his  favorite.  Johnny  was  up  before  him,  and  came 
toward  Arty,  dashing  something  from  his  eyes  with  his 
brown  fist. 

''Well?"  said  Arthur,  with  a  little  quiver  in  his 
voice. 

"He's  all  swelled  up,"  sobbed  the  boy. 

Arthur  ran  down  into  the  meadow.  The  little  black 
steer  was  lying  cold  and  stiff.     Tige's  journey  was  done. 

There  was  lamentation  in  the  camp,  and  the  sallow 
Missourian,  who  had  camped  with  Captain  Rose  and 
the  boys,  said,  with  the  deepest  melancholy: 

"Such  luck!     Wish  I  hadn't  a-come!" 

From  this  point  the  emigrants  dropped  out  to  the 
north  and  south,  and  some  pressed  on  to  the  westward, 
striking  for  the  rich  mines  said  to  exist  on  the  edge  of 
the  Sacramento  Valley. 

The  news  was  good.  More  than  that,  it  was  intoxi- 
cating.    Men  raced  about  as  if  they  had  a  fever  in 


THE  GOLDEN  LAND  247 

their  bones.  The  wildest  stories  of  gold  finds  floated 
among  the  camps,  faces  grew  sharp  with  anxiety  and 
covetousness,  and  mysterious  murmurs  of  robberies 
and  darker  crimes  began  to  fill  the  air.  The  boys  were 
on  the  edge  of  the  gold-diggings.  The  wildness  and 
lawlessness  came  up  from  the  whirl  beneath  like  faint 
echoes  into  these  peaceful  old  forest  solitudes. 

On  the  last  day  of  September,  the  boy  emigrants 
mounted  Chaparral  Hill.  Mont,  Arty,  and  Barnard, 
climbing  a  peak  near  by,  looked  ofl^  on  a  golden  valle}^, 
rolling  far  to  the  west,  shining  with  streams  and 
checkered  with  patches  of  timber.  Westward,  a  misty 
mountain  wall  of  blue  melted  into  the  pale  sky.  Nearer, 
a  range  of  purple  peaks  rose,  like  a  floating  island  in 
the  midst  of  a  yellow  sea.  This  was  the  valley  of  the 
Sacramento,  with  the  Coast  Range  in  the  distance  and 
the  Sutter  Buttes  in  the  midst.  Behind  all,  but  un- 
seen, rolled  the  Pacific. 

The  wagons  crept  over  Chaparral  Hill,  halted  by  a 
group  of  canvas  and  log  houses.  A  party  of  uncouth- 
looking  men  were  loitering  about  the  camp.  Beyond, 
by  a  creek,  others  were  shovelling  soil  into  a  long 
wooden  trough  in  which  water  was  running.  Others 
were  wading,  waist-deep,  in  the  stream. 

There  was  an  odor  of  fried  bacon  in  the  air,  and  the 
sinking  sun  shone  redly  over  the  camp-fires,  where  the 
men  were  cooking  their  supper. 


248  THE   BOY   EMIGRANTS 

"How's  the  diggings  ?"  asked  Captain  Rose  of  a  tall 
fellow,  who  was  lying  at  full  length  on  the  ground,  and 
teasing  a  captive  magpie. 

"Slim,"  was  the  reply. 

"Well,  I  reckon  we'll  stop  here  for  the  present. 
Claims  all  taken  up  ?" 

"Thar's  room  enough";  and  the  miner  laughed  as  he 
went  on  with  his  play  with  the  bird. 

The  boys,  somewhat  dejected,  drove  down  by  "the 
■     branch,"  unyoked  their  cattle,  and  set  up  their  tent. 

This  was  the  Golden  Land. 


CHAPTER  XVIII 

CROWBAIT   GULCH 

There  was  not  much  time  for  the  young  miners  to 
look  about  them.  Their  provisions  were  nearly  ex- 
hausted, cold  weather  was  coming  on,  and  what  mining 
was  to  be  done  must  quickly  be  undertaken.  They 
were  on  one  of  the  innumerable  branches  of  the  Rio 
de  las  Plumas,  or,  as  the  new-comers  called  it,  "for 
short,"  Feather  River.  This  branch  was  only  a  shal- 
low creek  now,  rippling  over  a  bed  of  gravel.  Later, 
it  would  be  swollen  with  the  fall  rains,  and  choked  with 
floating  ice.  Their  stock  of  ready  cash,  which  had 
seemed  considerable  when  they  left  home,  was  now  so 
small  that  it  would  hardly  buy  a  hundred  pounds  of 
flour.  Their  bacon  was  quite  gone,  and  the  only  staple 
article  of  food  left  them  was  a  goodly  bag  of  beans. 
Farmer  Stevens  had  insisted  on  their  taking  a  plenty 
of  beans.  The  boys  had  remonstrated,  and  Barney 
had  laughingly  said  that  the  miners  would  accuse  them 
of  being  bean  merchants.  But  he  and  Arty  now  saw 
the  wisdom  of  their  father's  advice.     Beans  were  in 

great  demand.    Sixteen  dollars  for  two  quarts  of  beans 

249 


2SO  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

had  been  paid  at  the  Chaparral  Hill  diggings;  and  the 
boys  had  nearly  a  bushel. 

By  some  miscalculation,  as  they  thought,  they  had 
brought  more  coffee  than  they  needed.  Often  and 
often,  the  weather  was  so  bad  that  they  could  not  roast 
and  grind  the  green  coffee  which  was  part  of  their 
outfit;  they  had  used  the  tea,  because  that  could  be 
easily  steeped,  as  long  as  they  could  heat  a  pot  of  water. 
But  the  coffee  had  resisted  all  their  efforts  to  get  rid 
of  it.  When  their  wagon  was  upset  in  the  hard  places 
on  the  Plains  and  over  the  mountains,  the  coffee  was 
always  safe.  The  passing  emigrants,  who  asked  them 
if  they  had  any  stores  to  sell  or  exchange,  never  wanted 
coffee.  It  was  too  much  trouble  to  prepare  it.  The 
boys  had  thirty  pounds  of  coffee  and  almost  a  bushel 
of  beans.  This  represented  a  small  fortune,  though 
they  had  no  money. 

They  had  one  ox,  one  cow,  and  one  horse.  But  poor 
old  Jim  was  so  thin  and  feeble  that  he  was  at  once 
named  by  the  friendly  miners  "Crowbait."  Their 
wagon  was  in  fair  condition.  The  tent  was  as  good  as 
new.  They  had  pans,  picks,  and  shovels  for  gold- 
mining;  and  with  stout  hearts,  strong  hands,  and  high 
hopes,  what  was  not  possible  to  them  .?  The  gold  was 
hidden  all  about  them  in  the  ravines,  gulches,  and 
river  beds.  They  had  come  to  dig  it  out,  and  they 
were  impatient  to  begin. 


CROWBAIT  GULCH  251 

Scattered  up  and  down  the  stream  were  small  en- 
campments of  diggers.  A  few  had  tents;  many  slept 
in  the  open  air,  wrapped  in  their  blankets,  though  the 
nights  were  chill.  Some  of  the  more  home-loving 
miners  had  built  booths  of  boughs  and  logs,  and  had 
fashioned  rude  tables,  benches,  and  a  few  bunks  from 
the  costly  lumber  which  found  its  way  up  here  from 
Greasertown,  a  small  camp  down  the  river,  where 
some  industrious  Mexicans  had  established  a  saw-pit. 
These  little  settlements  were  at  once  given  names  of 
some  sort,  in  order  to  distinguish  them  from  each 
other  in  the  rude  gossip  of  the  country.  One  group  of 
tents,  cabins  and  booths,  which  boasted  of  a  popula- 
tion of  twenty-five  men,  was  known  as  "Forty  Thieves," 
though  there  were  only  twenty-five  people  in  the  camp, 
and  not  one  was  a  thief.  Another  was  called  "Fatty 
Gulch,"  because  one  of  the  members  of  the  party  in 
the  camp  happened  to  be  an  excessively  lean  fellow; 
and  another  was  dubbed  "Swellhead  Diggings,"  on 
account  of  the  personal  character  of  several  miners 
located  there.  Farther  down  stream  were  "Slap-Jack 
Bar,"  "Bogus  Thunder,"  and  "One  Eye,"  names 
which  might  have  meant  something  yesterday  and 
which  stuck  there  long  after  men  had  forgotten  why 
they  were  ever  given. 

"I  allow  I'll  light  out  of  this,"  said  Captain  Rose, 
when  they  had  been  two  days  in  camp.     They  had 


252  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

settled  up  accounts  all  around,  and  were  now  ready  to 
dissolve  partnership. 

*'Well,  if  you  go,  we  allow  to  stay,  and  if  you  stay, 
we  allow  to  go,"  said  Hiram,  very  frankly.  "Thar 
ain't  room  for  all  of  us." 

"You  can  stay  then,  boys,"  said  Rose.  "There's 
nothin'  doin'  here.  Nobody's  makin'  more  than  one 
or  two  ounces  a  day,  and  I  want  more  than  that." 

"More  than  that !"  cried  Arty,  opening  his  eyes  with 
amazement.  "Why!  one  ounce  is  sixteen  dollars. 
Sixteen  to  thirty  dollars  a  day!" 

"That  may  suit  you,  young  fellers,"  said  Rose,  dis- 
contentedly. "I've  heerd  tell  on  chaps  down  on  the 
American  River  takin'  out  a  thousand  dollars  at  a 
lick.  That's  about  my  size.  I'm  bound  to  go  out  to 
the  American.    Be  you  fellers  goin'  to  hang  together  }" 

"Really,  we  had  not  thought  of  that,"  said  Mont, 
with  a  smile.  "We  have  not  divided  up  our  little 
property.  I  suppose  we  shall  stick  together  for  the 
present." 

"I  thought  ye  were  limited  pardners,"  rejoined 
Rose.  "And  if  ye  are,  I'd  like  to  have  Arty  along  with 
me.  Arty's  a  chirpy  boy,  and  I'll  give  him  a  good 
show  if  he'd  like  to  go  along." 

Arthur  had  heard  a  great  deal  about  the  fabulous 
riches  dug  up  along  the  banks  of  the  American,  and  he 
was   fired   with    ambition   to   make   money   suddenly. 


CROWBAIT  GULCH  253 

Here  was  a  chance  for  him  to  go.  He  looked  at  Barney 
and  Johnny.  He  caught  Mont's  eye  watching  him 
with  an  expression  of  anxiety,  and,  breathing  a  little 
quicker  than  usual,  he  said:  "Thank  you,  Captain 
Rose,  I'll  stay  with  the  rest  of  the  boys." 

"Hope  you'll  never  be  sorry  for  it.  There's  lots  of 
gold  down  there.  None  here  to  speak  of,"  and  Cap- 
tain Rose  went  away  disappointed,  for  he  liked  the  lad. 

"How  about  this  pardnership,  anyhow  .?"  said  Hiram 
when  Rose,  a  few  days  later,  had  left  them  to  them- 
selves. 

"My  idea  about  it  is  that  we  go  right  on  together," 
said  Barney.  "Arty  and  I  must  hang  together,  of 
course.  And  I  don't  see  how  we  can  give  up  Johnny. 
He's  bound  to  stay  with  Arty,  there,  so  that's  three  of 
us  to  begin  with.     How  about  you  and  Tom,  Hi .?" 

Hi  "allowed"  that  he  could  not  go  off  by  himself. 
Tom  was  willing  to  do  whatever  Hi  said,  but  he  pre- 
ferred to  stay  with  the  Stevens  boys. 

"I  was  the  last  one  of  the  firm  at  Council  Bluffs,  you 
know,"  said  Mont,  "and  I  agreed  that  it  should  be  a 
limited  partnership,  lasting  only  until  we  reached  the 
diggings;  and  here  we  are." 

"And  you  want  to  bust  up  the  pardnership?"  de- 
manded Hi. 

"Oh  no,  I'm  in  favor  of  continuing  the  old  firm  as 
long  as  we  can  Hve  and  work  together  harmoniously." 


254  THE   BOY   EMIGRANTS 

"That's  just  my  gait,"  said  Hi,  enthusiastically. 
** Shake!"  and  he  extended  his  rough  hand  in  token  of 
concluding  the  bargain.  Mont  took  his  hand,  and, 
with  a  laugh,  put  his  arm  on  Arty's  shoulder,  and  said: 
"This  is  the  little  chap  that  keeps  us  together.  So 
long  as  he  has  not  set  the  example  of  running  off  on  a 
wild  goose  chase,  we  can  do  no  less  than  stay  here  and 
work  it  out." 

"I'd  have  liked  to  have  seen  him  going  off  with  John 
Rose,"  grumbled  Barney. 

"It's  a  share  and  share  alike,  isn't  it?"  asked  Hi. 
Just  then  his  eye  lighted  on  Johnny,  who  was  busily 
cooking  over  the  plentiful  camp-fire.  Hi's  counte- 
nance fell,  and  he  asked,  with  some  constraint:  "How 
about  the  little  kid  yonder?" 

"Don't  call  him  a  kid,"  said  Arthur,  indignantly. 
"That's  slang.  Besides,  Johnny's  quite  a  big  boy 
now." 

"Yes,"  laughed  Hi.  "He's  four  months  older  than 
when  we  took  him  in  at  Council  Bluffs.  He  can't  do 
no  work.  You  can,  because  you're  two  or  three  years 
older  than  he  is,  and  are  right  smart  at  things." 

"Johnny  can  do  as  much  as  I  can,  come  now;  and 
I'm  willing  to  share  with  him.  Tom,  he,  and  I  will 
have  to  do  the  drudgery  anyhow." 

"No  more  drudgery  for  me,"  put  in  Tom,  with  a 
frown. 


CROWBAIT  GULCH  255 

"See  here,"  said  Mont,  "there  are  three  of  us  grown 
fellows  and  three  boys.  Arty  and  Barney  belong  to- 
gether, and  Tom,  of  course,  joins  his  brother  Hi.  Let 
Johnny's  share  be  with  mine;  that  will  make  three 
equal  partners  in  the  camp.  For  my  part,  I  am  willing 
to  give  Johnny  one-third  of  all  I  make.  How's  that, 
youngster  V  he  said  to  Johnny,  who  had  left  his  bean- 
stew  to  listen  to  this  interesting  discussion. 

"Oh,  that's  too  much,  Mont,"  said  the  lad,  grate- 
fully.    "I  am  willing  to  work  for  my  board." 

"And  clothes,"  added  Tom,  who  was  astonished  at 
Mont's  liberal  proposition. 

"Yes,  and  clothes,"  said  Johnny,  who  had  by  this 
time  found  his  Council  Bluffs  outfit  necessary  to  cover 
his  growing  limbs. 

"We  shall  all  become  covetous,  by  and  by,"  said 
Mont,  seriously.  "I  want  to  make  a  bargain  now,  that 
we  shall  all  keep.  Barney,  you  and  Hi  ought  to  be 
willing  to  divide  with  your  brothers  as  I  shall  divide 
with  little  Johnny  here.  I  suppose  you  are.  Then  we 
shall  have  only  three  shares,  though  each  of  us  will 
have  to  divide  with  one  of  the  boys;  that  is,  provided 
we  have  anything  to  divide.  For,  after  all,"  he  added 
with  a  sober  smile,  "we  are  counting  our  chickens  be- 
fore they  are  hatched." 

"The  fact  is,"  said  Barney,  "Arty  and  I  are  equal 
partners  with  each  other.     We  settled  that  before  we 


256  THE   BOY   EMIGRANTS 

left  home.  But  I  am  agreed  that  there  shall  be  three 
equal  shares  in  the  new  concern — ^yours,  Hi's,  and 
mine.  Never  mind  what  we  do  with  each  share  of  any 
division  we  may  make.     How's  that,  Hi?" 

"It's  a  whack,"  said  Hi,  heartily.  So  the  partner- 
ship was  reorganized  and  the  partners  were  ready  for 
work. 

They  had  "panned  out"  enough  gold  from  a  dry 
gulch  near  by  to  assure  them  that  they  could  make 
fair  wages  there  for  a  time.  Most  of  the  mining  in 
that  region  was  done  by  digging  up  the  gold-bearing 
earth  and  carrying  it  to  the  river-bank,  where  it  was 
washed  out  with  pans,  cradles,  or  sluice-boxes,  and  the 
gold  picked  out.  The  commonest  way  was  to  carry, 
or  "pack,"  the  earth  in  sacks  on  men's  backs,  and  then 
"pan"  it  out  by  the  river.  It  was  wearisome  work. 
The  pan  was  partly  filled  with  dirt,  then  filled  to  the 
brim  with  water,  and  twirled  around  and  around,  first 
one  way,  then  another,  in  the  hands  of  the  operator. 
The  fine  earth  rose  to  the  top,  and  was  carried  over  the 
edge  of  the  pan  with  a  peculiar  turn  of  the  wrist. 
Water  was  added,  and  was  whirled  off  again,  carrying 
the  refuse  earth  with  it,  until  nothing  was  left  in  the 
bottom  of  the  pan  but  coarse  sand  and  gold.  Some- 
times— very  often,  indeed — after  all  the  washing  and 
watching,  there  was  nothing  found  in  the  bottom  but 
coarse  black  sand.     But   a  miner  who  had   a  shovel 


CROWBAIT  GULCH  257 

and  a  pan  had  all  his  necessary  mining  tools.  With 
these  on  his  back,  sometimes  carrying  a  pick,  he  trav- 
ersed the  country,  searching  for  good  diggings.  If  he 
found  a  poor  prospect,  he  journeyed  on  and  on  looking 
for  gold. 

On  the  very  first  day  after  the  boys  had  camped  on 
Chaparral  Creek  they  had  ** prospected"  for  gold. 
The  precious  stuff,  in  lumps,  nuggets,  dust,  and  coarse 
grains,  was  already  familiar  to  their  sight.  They  had 
sold  a  quart  pot  full  of  coffee  for  an  ounce  of  golden 
ore.     But  they  had  never  dug  any  out  of  the  ground. 

It  was  an  exciting  time.  In  a  gulch  which  led  down 
from  the  mountains  and  opened  out  to  the  creek  was  a 
flat  place,  overgrown  with  brambles  and  small  shrubs  of 
chaparral — a  thorny  bush — and  cut  up  with  the  action 
of  winter  torrents.  This  had  once  been  the  bed  of  a 
stream,  but  only  a  slender  thread  of  water  crept  down 
under  the  rocks  which  had  formed  the  bottom  of  the 
old  creek.  The  top  soil  was  red  and  dry.  Beneath  it 
grew  darker,  browner,  and  more  gravelly.  This  they 
shovelled  into  pans,  and  lugged  to  the  edge  of  the  creek 
below.  Mont  and  Hi  each  took  a  pan  and  began  to 
wash.  Hi  threw  the  water  over  his  legs  instead  of 
from  him,  amidst  the  laughter  of  the  boys,  who  anx- 
iously looked  on.  Mont  twirled  his  panful  of  mud, 
sand,  and  water  quite  dexterously,  flirting  off  the 
superfluous    stuff  with    a    professional    skill   that    de- 


258  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

lighted  Arty,  who  secretly  hoped  that  Mont  would  be 
the  first  to  find  the  gold.  Hi  wabbled  his  pan  about 
clumsily,  and  soon  covered  his  legs  with  mud  and  water. 
The  turbid  currents  rippled  over  the  edge  of  Mont's 
pan  as  it  deftly  revolved  in  his  hands.  Arty  thought 
he  saw  the  shimmer  of  the  gold  in  the  cloudy  mass. 

"Hear  it !  Hear  it !"  shouted  Hi.  "Hear  it  scratch- 
in'  on  the  bottom  of  the  pan  !" 

Sure  enough  there  was  a  rattle  of  something  in  the 
pan  different  from  the  steady  grinding  of  the  coarse 
sand.  Just  then.  Hi,  who  was  highly  excited,  twirled 
his  pan  out  of  his  hands,  and  it  fell,  amidst  a  chorus  of 
"Ohs"  from  the  boys,  bottom  up,  with  its  contents 
spilled  all  about.  Hi  impatiently  snatched  up  his  pan, 
and  there,  in  a  confused  heap  of  sand  and  gravel,  was 
a  lump  of  bright,  hard  and  shining  gold  !  With  a  great 
hurrah.  Hi  seized  it,  held  it  in  the  air,  cut  a  clumsy 
caper,  and  cried: 

"The  fust  gold  for  the  Fender  family!" 

It  was  a  smooth,  water-worn  lump,  of  a  dark  yellow 
color,  about  as  big  as  a  robin's  egg,  and  shaped  very 
much  like  a  pear  that  has  been  squeezed  nearly  flat. 

Before  the  boys  could  sufficiently  express  their  joy 
over  this  first  gold  of  their  own  finding,  Mont,  who  had 
only  looked  up  with  shining  eyes  as  he  kept  on  with  his 
work,  whirled  off  the  watery  contents  of  his  pan  and 
showed  the  heavier  mass  at  the  bottom.     There  was 


CROWBAIT  GULCH  259 

about  a  quarter  of  an  inch  of  black  sand,  and,  shining 
on  the  surface,  were  four  or  five  particles  of  gold.  One 
was  almost  as  big  as  a  pea.  The  others  were  a  little 
larger  than  pinheads,  and  one  was  a  crumb  so  small 
that  it  would  have  been  lost  if  the  black  sand  had  not 
shown  it  so  plainly. 

"Sho!  that  ain't  nothin',''  said  Tom,  contemptu- 
ously. 

"Nothin'l"  exclaimed  Hi,  with  equal  contempt. 
"Mont's  got  the  color  there,  and  more  too.  That's 
over  three  dollars;  and  I  allow  one  dollar  a  pan  is  a 
mighty  big  thing.  Them  fellers  up  to  Forty  Thieves 
said  that  twenty-five  cents  to  a  pan  was  good  diggin's." 

A  tall  miner  from  One  Eye,  who  was  on  his  way  up 
the  creek,  paused  as  he  went  by,  looked  on  curiously 
at  the  boys,  and  with  much  excitement  examined  the 
half-washed  heaps  of  earth  on  the  ground. 

"Right  smart  sort  of  a  scad  you've  thar,  stranger," 
he  said,  looking  at  Hi's  find.  "Must  be  more  whar 
that  come  from." 

"Yes,"  said  Mont,  "we  have  just  been  prospecting 
up  the  ravine.  Shouldn't  you  think  it  worth  while  to 
follow  it  up  .?" 

"Wal,  I  reckon  yes.  Chispas  like  that  yere  don't 
grow  into  every  mud-hole.  Thar's  quartz  rock  where 
that  yere  come  from.  But  that's  a  long  ways  from 
yere."     And  the  tall  stranger  took  his  way  on  up  the 


26o  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

stream,  quite  unconcerned  at  the  sight  of  the  yellow 
metal  which  had  so  excited  our  boys. 

This  was  before  Rose  had  left  them.  Rose,  for  his 
part,  was  not  in  favor  of  creek-diggings.  He  had  heard 
of  "crevicing"  where  the  miners  dug  out  the  precious 
stuff  from  crevices  in  the  rocks,  after  tearing  way  the 
earth;  and  nothing  but  "crevicing"  would  suit  him 
now.  Accepting  the  advice  of  some  friendly  neighbors 
at  Forty  Thieves,  the  boys  formally  made  claim  to  the 
dry  gulch,  which  they  called  "Hi's  Gulch"  from  that 
day.  They  were  mortified,  some  weeks  later,  to  find 
that  the  miners  of  the  neighborhood  had  christened 
this  "Crowbait  Gulch,"  on  account  of  some  fancied 
connection  which  Old  Jim  had  with  their  good  fortune. 
Their  discomfiture  was  further  increased  when  they 
discovered  that  the  name  was  extended  over  their 
camp  and  party,  so  that  they  were  called  "The  Crow- 
baits,"  just  as  if  they  had  been  a  tribe  of  Indians  with 
that  singular  title. 

No  disrespect  was  meant  to  them,  however,  and  they 
thought  they  could  endure  being  known  as  "The  Crow- 
baits"  so  long  as  their  nearest  neighbors  were  content 
to  be  called  "Forty  Thieves." 

Now,  at  last,  they  had  money  enough  to  buy  flour 
and  meat,  a  claim  that  was  as  good  as  a  mine,  and  a 
tent  over  their  heads.  Already  gleams  of  gold  shone 
in  their  hands,  and  rosy  visions  of  wealth  began  to 


CROWBAIT  GULCH  261 

rise.  There  was  a  tolerably  sure  prospect  for  the  future. 
Their  trials  were  over,  they  thought.  Their  riches 
were  almost  on  the  surface  of  the  ground. 

**Do  you  know  what  this  means,  Arty.?"  said  Bar- 
nard one  day,  showing  him  a  crumb  of  gold. 

"Victuals  and  drink,  board  and  clothes,"  said  the 
matter-of-fact  youth. 

Barney  stooped  and  whispered  in  his  ear  one  word — 
**Home." 


CHAPTER  XIX 

GOLD 

In  a  few  weeks  the  young  gold-seekers  accumulated 
quite  a  stock  of  the  precious  ore.  They  could  hardly 
believe  their  eyes  when  they  weighed  it  over  and  over 
again,  figured  up  the  value  of  it,  estimated  it,  and 
speculated  on  the  chances  of  there  being  more  like  it 
in  their  gulch.  It  was  a  marvellous  thing  that  they 
should  actually  dig  this  stuff  out  of  the  ground. 

But  there  it  was.  It  cost  them  many  a  weary  day, 
and  many  a  back-ache.  They  had  stuck  to  their  gold- 
pans;  and  two  of  the  elder  members  of  the  party 
washed  out  the  earth,  which  the  others  dug  up  in  the 
gulch,  and  carried  in  sacks  to  the  brink  of  the  creek, 
where  water  was  plenty.  They  had  tried  to  make  use 
of  the  little  stream  in  the  bottom  of  the  gulch,  but  it 
was  too  slight  to  afford  water  enough;  and  they  were 
continually  digging  under  it,  in  hopes  of  finding  rich 
lumps,  or  "chispas."  The  younger  boys,  in  their 
intervals  of  packing  the  gold-bearing  earth  to  the 
washing  party  by  the  creek,  often  washed  out  a  panful 

of  earth,  furtively  and  eagerly,  hoping  to  find  a  rich 

262 


GOLD  263 

return  for  their  own  labor.  The  gold,  however,  was 
for  the  most  part  in  small  bits, — like  a  very  coarse  gun- 
powder,— with  occasional  flakes  as  fine  as  meal.  No 
such  lump  as  that  found  by  Hi  at  the  beginning  of  their 
prospecting  could  be  discovered  in  the  gulch. 

The  diggings  extended,  so  far  as  they  could  judge, 
quite  across  the  flat  mouth  of  the  gulch  or  ravine, 
which  was  four  or  five  hundred  feet  across,  and  out- 
ward to  a  sharp  ledge,  which  ran  diagonally  across  it, 
and  thence  sloped  off  to  the  edge  of  the  creek.  This 
ravine  narrowed  rapidly,  and  ran  up  into  the  woody 
ridge,  about  two  thousand  feet  from  its  mouth.  So 
the  gold-bearing  claim  of  the  young  emigrants  was  a 
V-shaped  patch  of  earth  about  four  or  five  hundred 
feet  wide,  and  tapering  off  to  a  point  about  one  thou- 
sand feet  from  the  mouth,  and  thence  gradually  ascend- 
ing into  the  slope  of  the  ridge.  Mont  and  Barney  made 
a  very  systematic  "prospecting"  of  the  claim  before 
the  boys  decided  to  stay.  They  sank  deep  holes  at 
intervals  along  the  V  which  has  just  been  described, 
digging  sometimes  to  a  depth  of  six  or  eight  feet  before 
they  reached  the  bottom  layer  of  coarse  black  sand, 
gravel,  and  rock.  The  top  surface  was  a  rich  soil, 
filled  with  vegetable  mold  and  roots;  next  below  was  a 
clayey  loam,  and  then  the  gold-bearing  sand,  gravel, 
and  pebbles.  Below  all  was  an  uneven  layer  of  solid 
rock,  which  seemed  like  the  bottom  of  a  basin.     This 


264  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

was  the  bed-rock,  and  it  rose  gradually  on  either  side  of 
the  ravine  until  its  nearly  perpendicular  sides  were 
lost  in  the  abrupt  slopes  which  formed  the  walls  of 
the  gulch.  Under  this  rock,  which  could  be  broken 
through  in  places,  no  gold  was  ever  found.  The  bed- 
rock, then,  was  like  a  dish;  it  rested  on  a  layer  of  sterile, 
yellow  gravel  and  clay.  Into  its  platter-like  surface 
the  rain  and  floods  of  ages  had  washed  down  the  soil, 
gravel,  and  water-worn  gold  which  had  once  been 
scattered  among  the  hills.  Perhaps  this  gulch  had 
been  the  outlet  of  an  ancient  river.  Here  the  wash  of 
the  mountains  had  been  carried  down  by  freshets. 
The  sand  and  gravel  had  sunk  to  the  bottom,  resting 
on  the  bed-rock.  The  gold,  washed  out  of  ledges,  now 
hidden  in  the  hills,  had  been  worn  smooth  or  into  fan- 
tastic forms  as  it  was  tumbled  along  in  the  current  and 
over  the  rocks;  it  had  been  swept  into  the  river,  and 
had  gone  to  the  bottom  with  the  gravel  and  stone. 
The  sand  had  followed  it,  and  the  soft  soil  which  set- 
tled in,  as  the  stream  slackened  its  current  and  became 
shallow,  filled  in  all  the  interstices.  Strange  changes 
took  place  in  the  surface  of  the  country.  Hills  rose 
up  where  none  had  been  before,  and  grass,  shrubs,  and 
trees  grew  luxuriantly  where  once  a  river  had  flowed 
swiftly  along.  In  Crowbait  Gulch,  for  instance,  the 
water  almost  ceased.  The  winter  rains  washed  down 
the  soil  from  the  surrounding  hills,  and  covered  the 


GOLD  265 

rocks,  the  gravel,  the  gold,  and  the  sand.  Each  sea- 
son added  its  deposit  of  vegetable  loam,  and  grass, 
wild  roses,  chaparral,  and  manzanita  bushes  grew  up, 
as  if  to  hide  the  golden  secret  which  lay  buried  far 
beneath. 

Into  this  tangled  thicket,  broken  only  by  the  bed  of 
a  little  stream,  and  by  a  few  grassy  spaces,  came  the 
young  treasure-seekers.  Countless  ages  had  been 
necessary  to  prepare  for  them.  While  centuries  came 
and  went,  this  wonderful  work  had  gone  on  unseen. 
The  gold  had  been  rolled  and  tumbled,  age  after  age, 
until  it  was  rounded  or  smoothed  like  water-worn 
pebbles,  and,  while  generations  lived  and  died,  not 
even  knowing  of  the  existence  of  this  wonderland,  the 
precious  ore,  for  which  men  go  so  far  and  work  so 
hard,  sunk  into  its  latest  resting-place,  and  was  covered 
from  all  human  eyes.  But  not  forever,  for  into  this 
primeval  soHtude,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  had  come  the 
new  masters  of  the  mine. 

The  gold  was  laid  in  Crowbait  Gulch  for  the  boy  emi- 
grants. But  it  was  not  yielded  up  to  them  without  a 
struggle.  Mont  dug  manfully,  Arthur  helping  him  at 
times,  and  at  times  packing  the  earth  and  gravel  to  Hi 
and  Barney,  who  squatted  all  day  long  by  the  bank  of 
the  stream,  twirling,  twirling  their  pans,  until  their 
eyes  ached  and  their  heads  reeled  with  the  constant 
whirling  of  water,  sand,  and  gravel — water,  sand,  and 


266  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

gravel,  round  and  round  again.  Not  every  panful  of 
earth  held  gold.  Very  often  it  happened  that  the 
patient  labor  required  to  wash  out  a  pan  brought  noth- 
ing but  disappointment.  Nevertheless,  it  was  fascinat- 
ing business.  As  the  soil  disappeared  over  the  edge  of 
the  pan,  and  the  sand  began  to  show  through  the  clear- 
ing water,  the  washer  might  expect  to  see  the  golden 
gleam  of  the  ore.  Or  he  saw  nothing  but  common  sand 
and  gravel;  and  he  began  again  with  the  hope  that 
never  died  in  him. 

Hi  grew  intensely  interested  in  the  work.  He  was 
continually  expecting  to  find  a  big  lump.  He  washed 
eagerly,  almost  feverishly.  If  he  found  a  few  rich 
grains  of  gold,  his  eyes  sparkled,  and  his  face  beamed 
with  pleasure.  If  his  pan  showed  nothing  but  barren 
sand,  his  countenance  changed,  and  he  scooped  up  a 
fresh  panful  of  earth  with  a  mutter  of  impatience.  He 
was  seldom  rewarded  by  any  marvellous  return,  and 
when  Barney,  one  day,  washed  out  a  lump  of  gold  as 
large  as  a  hickory  nut.  Hi  broke  out  in  open  rebellion 
against  his  "luck,"  and  he  regarded  Barney's  find  with 
eyes  of  covetousness,  as  if  it  were  not  one  more  ac- 
quisition to  the  common  stock.  Then,  another  day, 
when  Arthur,  uttering  a  cry  of  joy  and  triumph,  dug 
out  a  lump  of  gold  almost  as  big  as  that  first  found  by 
Hi,  he  threw  down  his  pan  with  an  exclamation  of 
disgust  and  "allowed"  that  he  had  washed  long  enough. 


GOLD  267 

He  would  take  his  turn  at  digging.  And  so  he  did, 
until  after  a  while  Mont,  thinking  that  Hi  was  growing 
thin  and  haggard  with  that  work,  exchanged  places 
with  him  again,  and  Hi  went  back  to  the  pan. 

One  day,  while  all  hands  were  hard  at  work  in  and 
around  the  gulch,  a  voice  up  the  thickly  wooded  hill 
cried:  "Hello,  you !    How  does  a  fellow  get  down  ?" 

"Slide,"  said  Mont,  with  a  smile,  as  he  straightened 
himself  up  from  his  toil  and  looked  up  the  ridge. 
There  was  a  crashing  and  rustling  in  the  brush,  and 
presently  a  small  cart  came  down  the  steep  slope  back- 
ward and  dragging  after  it  a  familiar  figure.  It  was 
Bush.  His  wagon  had  lost  its  cover,  and  he  was  partly 
harnessed  in  the  traces,  as  his  little  cow  had  been. 

Breaking  through  the  undergrowth,  and  half-riding, 
half-tumbling.  Bush  and  his  go-cart  reached  bottom  at 
last.    Bush  was  brown,  ragged,  and  as  cheerful  as  ever. 

"Sh'd  think  you  might  hev'  a  road  for  visitors,  least- 
ways," he  managed  to  say,  when  he  could  catch  his 
breath.  Then,  having  disengaged  himself  from  his 
rude  harness,  he  advanced  with  both  hands  out- 
stretched, cordially  exclaiming,  "I'm  lookin'  for  the 
honest  miners  of  Crowbait;  and  I  reckon  I've  struck 
'em  at  last.  Shake!"  and  Bush  warmly  greeted  his 
old  companions. 

"Where's  your  cow?"  asked  Barney,  when  their 
former  comrade  had  been  duly  welcomed. 


268  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"Wal,  Suke,  you  see,  she  up  and  died  one  day. 
After  I  left  you  at  the  divide,  I  struck  off  toward  the 
north  part  of  the  Yuba,  and  a  powerful  rough  time  we 
had  of  it.  No  trail — rocks,  gulches,  and  precipices 
till  you  can't  rest.  Suke  was  more  or  less  alkalied  on 
the  Plains,  I  reckon;  and  the  pull  through  the  timber 
was  too  much  for  her.  She  pegged  out  one  night,  and 
the  coyotes  picked  her  bones  before  day.  Poor  Suke  !" 
and  Bush  twinkled  a  genuine  tear  from  his  eye,  as  he 
thought  of  his  vicious  little  cow. 

"Well!  how  are  you  making  it,"  he  continued 
briskly;  "struck  it  rich?" 

"Yes,  we're  doing  first-rate,"  answered  Barnard, 
heartily. 

"Oh,  not  so  powerful  rich,  though,"  said  Hi,  with  an 
uneasy  glance  at  the  rest  who  were  gathered  around. 
"Just  a  livin',  you  know," 

"Oh,  you  needn't  be  afraid  of  me,"  said  Bush  very 
frankly;  "I  ain't  a-goin'  to  stay  here;  I'm  just  a- 
pushin'  my  way  across  to  Dogtown,  where  I  hear  there's 
great  diggings.  Thought  I  would  take  Crowbait  on 
my  way.  I  seen  Rose  over  on  the  North  Yuba.  He 
told  me  where  you  were,  and  when  I  inquired  for  'the 
Boston  boys,'  I  learned  you  was  Crowbait.  Crowbait ! 
I  s'pose  that  means  Old  Jim.?" 

"Yes,"  laughed  Arty,  "poor  Old  Jim,  who  ought 
to  have  died  on  the   Plains,  has  lived   long  enough 


GOLD  269 

to  give  us  his  name.  How's  your  luck  at  mining, 
Bush?" 

"Well,  just  ornery;  just  ornery,  boys,"  and  here 
Bush  fished  out  of  the  bottom  of  his  go-cart  a  canvas 
shot-bag,  which  he  untied,  and  poured  therefrom  into 
his  gold-pan  about  ten  ounces  of  gold-dust.  "I  should 
say  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  dollars'  worth.  That's 
all  I've  got  to  show.  And  that  there  cow  of  mine 
would  have  fetched  almost  twice  as  much  if  she'd 
lived." 

"Where  did  you  pick  up  that  dust?"  asked  Mont. 

"Oh,  in  spots;  just  in  spots;  I  haven't  worked  reg'lar 
anywheres.  No  sooner  do  I  get  squared  off  for  a 
wrastle  with  the  pick  and  shovel  than  I  hear  of  a  better 
place,  and  I  can't  stay." 

"Why,  you  ain't  earnin'  great  wages,"  said  Hi,  dis- 
dainfully. 

"Sure's  you  live,"  rejoined  Bush,  with  a  sigh.  Then, 
brightening  up,  as  if  recalling  a  pleasant  thought,  he 
said:  "And  do  you  believe  it,  boys,  a  feller  over  on 
Rattlesnake  Bar  had  the  cheek  to  offer  me  day  wages. 
Fact,  he  did!"  he  added  at  the  expression  of  surprise 
on  the  boys'  faces. 

"How  much  ?"  asked  Tom. 

"Why,  twenty  dollars  a  day,  and  found.  Did  you 
ever  see  such  a  fool  ?" 

"What !   so  much  ?"  exclaimed  Arty. 


270  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"Much  !  much  !"  almost  screamed  Bush.  "What  do 
you  take  me  for  ?  D'yer  s'pose  I'm  a  Josh  to  come 
away  over  here  across  the  Plains  to  work  for  wages  ? 
Not  much,"  he  added  scornfully.  "I'm  goin'  to  strike 
for  a  pile." 

But  Bush,  if  he  had  not  made  much  money,  had  been 
busy  enough  collecting  news  of  all  his  old  acquain- 
tances. He  consented  to  stay  over  night  with  the  boys, 
and  gave  them  all  the  information  he  had  concerning 
the  country  and  the  people  in  it.  Philo  Dobbs,  Nance, 
and  her  mother  were  over  near  Sable  Mountain. 
When  last  heard  from  they  were  stopping  in  a  camp  of 
Maine  men,  whose  little  settlement  and  diggings  were 
called  Bangor.  Dobbs  had  "struck  it  rich";  then  he 
had  invested  it  in  gold  in  a  new  claim,  and  had  lost  it, 
and  all  this  had  happened  in  a  week  or  two.  Messer 
was  still  "down  on  his  luck,"  and  was  over  in  the  San 
Joaquin  country  somewhere. 

"Then  there  was  that  Dot-and-carry-one  chap," 
added  Bush. 

"Yes!"  exclaimed  Arthur,  "Bill  Bunce." 

"Bunce  was  his  name.  But  he  is  'Dot-and-carry- 
one'  in  places  where  he  stays  now.  'Dot,'  for  short,  I 
should  say.  I  heard  of  him.  He's  down  on  the  next 
branch  to  this,  making  money  hand  over  fist.  A  fool 
for  luck,  I  say.    Not  any  for  me." 

Bush  gave  the  boys  a  great  many  valuable  hints 


GOLD  171 

about  mining.  Though  he  had  not  been  himself  suc- 
cessful, he  knew  how  to  instruct  others.  Particularly 
he  urged  them  to  get  a  rocker;  it  would  wash  as  fast 
with  one  man  to  run  it  as  ten  men  could  with  pans. 
A  rocker,  or  cradle,  he  showed  them,  was  merely  an 
oblong  box,  open  at  one  end,  and  made  to  rattle  like 
a  winnowing  machine  by  shaking.  In  this  the  earth 
was  washed,  precisely  as  in  a  pan,  but  with  much 
greater  speed  and  thoroughness. 

The  boys  told  Bush  that  they  had  resolved  to  stay 
where  they  were  all  winter.  He  shook  his  head  at  this 
and  said: 

"I  never  have  seen  any  man  that  has  been  in  this 
country  much  longer  than  we  have.  Nobody's  been 
here  over  one  winter,  's  far's  I  know.  But  the  Injuns, 
they  say  the  snow's  right  deep  up  this  far  in  winter.  If 
you  winter  it  here,  you  may  as  well  get  up  a  log-house. 
You'll  freeze  in  this  cloth  tent.  It's  gettin'  on  to  No- 
vember now,  and  the  nights  are  fallish  already." 

This  was  a  new  view  of  the  situation  to  the  boys,  to 
whom  the  climate  was  utterly  unknown,  and  about 
which  they  had  taken  no  thought. 

Bush  pushed  on  merrily  next  morning,  and,  as  the 
boys  watched  him  on  his  way  up  the  branch,  shoving 
his  go-cart  before  him,  he  stopped  in  the  midst  of  his 
song  and  called  back: 

"How  about  grub  V 


272  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"Plenty  for  the  present,"  answered  Mont. 

"Lay  in  enough  before  snow  flies,  or  you'll  get 
pinched  before  spring.  There's  traders  down  to  Nye's 
Ranch  and  that's  your  place  to  buy." 

With  this  farewell  warning  and  advice,  Bush  waded 
deliberately  into  the  stream,  forded  it,  poured  the 
water  out  of  his  broken  boots,  whistled  cheerily  to 
himself,  and  disappeared  up  the  bank. 


CHAPTER  XX 

HOUSE-BUILDING 

To  build  a  house  without  lumber  was  the  next  task 
which  our  boys  were  to  attempt.  The  Mexicans,  com- 
monly called  "Greasers,"  who  had  set  up  a  jig-saw  in 
their  saw-pit  down  the  river,  asked  such  enormous 
prices  for  the  few  boards  and  planks  which  they  pro- 
duced that  the  boys  were  at  once  discouraged  from 
buying  of  them.  Lumber  was  in  demand  for  cradles, 
sluice-boxes,  and  other  mining  appliances,  and  the 
green  stuff  got  out  at  Greasertown  was  all  that  could 
be  obtained  in  that  region  of  the  country. 

But  the  lads  were  bent  on  having  a  house  over  their 
heads.  They  must  build  it  themselves.  They  had  no 
money  to  pay  laborers  with,  for  their  little  accumu- 
lation, handsome  as  it  was  to  them,  would  not  go  far 
toward  hiring  assistance,  even  if  there  had  been  men 
to  hire. 

But  timber  was  growing  on  the  hills  near  them,  and 
they  had  nearly  tools  enough  to  build  a  cabin  with, 
and  what  they  did  not  have,  their  good-natured  neigh- 
bors at  Forty  Thieves  were  willing  to  lend.    Choosing 

273 


274  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

out  the  clean,  slender  pines  and  firs  of  the  forest  above, 
the  young  settlers  cut  down  enough  to  make  the  walls 
of  their  hut.  Trimmed  and  cut  into  lengths,  these  were 
"snaked"  out  of  the  woods  by  their  single  yoke  of 
cattle,  now  brought  into  use  once  more.  Then,  a  suit- 
able underpinning  of  solid  logs  having  been  prepared, 
the  tree-trunks  were  notched  at  the  ends,  so  as  to  fit 
into  each  other. 

It  was  heavy  work  handling  these  logs,  and  the 
younger  boys  were  almost  in  despair  when  they  re- 
flected that  the  upper  part  of  the  cabin  walls  must  be 
made  by  hoisting  the  sticks  to  a  height  above  their 
heads.  But  Mont  soon  showed  them  that,  by  raising 
one  end  of  a  log  on  the  unfinished  structure,  and  slid- 
ing the  other  end  up  on  an  inclined  stick  of  timber,  each 
timber  went  into  its  place,  and  the  walls  steadily  arose 
until  the  pen,  as  it  seemed  to  be,  was  eight  logs  high, 
and  just  about  as  many  feet  from  the  ground.  This 
was  the  work  of  days,  and  the  boys  surveyed  the  re- 
sult of  their  labors  with  admiration. 

"Gracious  goodness  !"  exclaimed  Arthur,  "we've  for- 
gotten the  doors  and  windows." 

"Sure  enough,"  said  Mont,  with  a  comical  smile. 
"How  shall  we  manage  to  put  them  in,  now  that  the 
walls  are  up  ?" 

"Will  the  whole  thing  have  to  come  down  again.'"' 
asked  the  boy  anxiously. 


HOUSE-BUILDING  275 

Hi  burst  out  laughing,  and  said: 

"Mont  knows  a  thing  or  two.  All  we  have  to  do 
now,  Arty,  is  to  cut  one  hole  for  the  door,  and  a  couple 
more  for  the  windows." 

"  But  the  logs  will  all  fall  out  if  they  are  cut  in  two 
in  the  middle." 

"We  chink  up  the  logs  first,  Arty,"  explained  Mont, 
"so  that  they  cannot  fall  apart,  then  we  saw  out  the 
openings." 

"Where  did  you  learn  all  that?  In  Boston.?"  de- 
manded Arthur. 

"Oh,  he's  got  a  head  onto  him,  he  has,"  murmured 
Hi,  with  an  admiring  look  at  Mont,  who,  somehow,  was 
the  "boss  carpenter"  of  the  house  in  the  wilderness. 

Hi,  it  must  be  confessed,  did  not  take  kindly  to 
house-building.  He  found  the  work  very  "disagreea- 
ble," as  he  often  remarked.  He  had  chopped  timber  in 
in  Sugar  Grove  times  enough  before  now;  but  this  labor 
he  thought  was  unprofitable.  It  interfered  with  min- 
ing. He  looked  longingly  at  the  neglected  pans  and 
picks  while  he  was  hauling  logs,  hewing  timber,  and 
splitting  out  "shakes"  for  the  covering  of  their  roof. 
And  one  moonlight  night,  Mont,  hearing  a  strange 
noise  outside  as  he  awoke  from  a  deep  sleep,  crept  out 
and  saw  Hi  making  a  pan  of  earth  by  the  side  of  the 
creek,  Pete  sitting  by  on  his  haunches,  an  interested 
spectator. 


276  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"Why,  what's  the  matter,  Hi?"  asked  Mont; 
"haven't  you  done  work  enough  to  sleep  on  ?" 

Hi  looked  a  little  confused  and  startled,  and  replied  : 

"  'Pears  like  I  couldn't  sleep  to-night.  I  dreamed  of 
finding  a  big  chunk  of  gold  up  there  by  that  there 
bowlder.  So  I  thought  I'd  come  out  and  shake  the  old 
pan  for  a  while." 

Mont  put  his  hand  kindly  on  the  young  man's 
shoulder  and  said: 

"My  dear  old  fellow,  I  am  afraid  you  are  getting 
avaricious.  Don't  let  us  try  to  be  rich  in  a  hurry.  You 
will  get  sick  with  overwork  and  anxiety,  and  then 
where  are  you  ?" 

Hi,  with  a  little  heat  of  manner,  and  growing  red  in 
the  moonlight,  said: 

"I  allow  my  health's  my  own.  I  put  my  gold  into 
the  company,  don't  I.?" 

"But  that  isn't  the  question,  Hi.  It  makes  me  sorry 
to  see  you  growing  so  careworn  and  old  before  your 
time.  We  have  a  good  claim,  and  nobody  can  take  it 
from  us " 

"I'd  like  to  see  *em  try  it  on  !"  broke  in  Hi. 

"And,  as  I  was  saying,"  resumed  Mont,  "nobody  can 
take  it  from  us.  We  shall  have  it  in  the  spring.  We 
can  live  comfortable  until  then.  What's  the  use  of 
being  in  a  hurry  .?" 

"What !"  exclaimed  Hi,  almost  with  horror.   "Knock 


HOUSE-BUILDING  277 

off  washin'  until  spring?  Not  if  I  know  it!"  and  he 
shook  his  pan  with  new  energy. 

*'HilIo !  what's  up  now  ?"  and  as  Barney  asked  that 
question,  he  struggled  out  of  the  tent,  half  awake,  and 
with  a  blanket  clinging  about  him. 

"Here,  you,  Crogan,"  cried  Arty  from  within,  "bring 
back  my  blanket!" 

"Oh,  it's  nothing,"  said  Mont,  cheerily,  *'only  Hi  has 
had  a  dream  of  gold,  and  he  has  come  out  to  find  it  in 
his  pan.     I  followed  to  see  it  come  true." 

"Did  it  come  true.'"'  asked  Barney,  grimly. 

"Not  yet." 

"And  it's  a  nice  time  of  night  for  you  to  be  out  here 
washing  gold,"  said  Arty,  who  had  crawled  out  into 
the  moonlight,  and  was  trying  to  read  the  time  on 
Barney's  white-faced  watch.  "Past  two  o'clock,  as  I 
live !  Hi  Fender !  you're  as  crazy  as  a  loon !  I'm 
ashamed  of  ye !" 

"Well,  if  you  are  all  going  to  make  a  row  about  it, 
I'll  go  back  to  bed."  And  back  to  bed  he  went,  saying 
to  himself,  "I  allow  that  Arty's  just  about  half  right, 
anyhow." 

Notwithstanding  Hi's  discontent,  the  cabin  rose. 
Light  spruce  poles  formed  the  rafters  of  the  roof,  and 
these  were  covered  with  shingles,  or  "shakes,"  split 
out  from  the  beautiful  white  pine  of  the  region.  Rudely 
hewn  timbers  supported  the  floor,  which  was  made  of 


278  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

thick,  oblong  blocks,  called  "puncheons,"  split  from 
the  short  lengths  of  oak  which  had  been  chopped  in 
the  forest.  A  hole  was  cut  in  the  rear,  and  a  huge 
fire-place  of  stone  was  built  in  it,  with  a  chimney  of 
bricks  piled  "cob-house  fashion,"  and  plastered  with 
mud,  leading  above  the  roof.  Two  openings,  protected 
by  cloth  from  their  wagon-cover,  furnished  light  and 
air.  Boards,  sparingly  taken  from  their  wagon-box, 
furnished  a  door  and  material  for  a  table  and  bench 
within.  The  chinks  between  the  logs  weie  filled  in  with 
sticks,  dry  grass,  and  cla3^  The  house  was  done,  and 
Arty,  having  lettered  the  name  on  a  spare  scrap  of 
canvas,  and  fastened  it  to  the  front  of  this  new  castle, 
christened  it  "Boston,"  amidst  the  applause  of  his 
comrades.  Hi  meditatively  cocked  his  head  on  one 
side  and  said: 

"I  never  did  Hke  Boston  for  a  name,  but  it's  enough 
sight  better  than  Crowbait." 

While  they  were  yet  admiring  the  general  effect  of 
their  new  home,  a  lame  man,  wearing  a  slouched  felt 
hat,  a  red  shirt,  and  a  pair  of  canvas  trousers,  slid  pain- 
fully down  the  bank,  dropped  his  kit  of  mining  tools 
with  a  sigh  of  relief,  and  said:  "Mornin'." 

Arthur  and  Tom  looked  at  him  with  amazement, 
and  Barney,  with  elaborate  politeness,  said: 

"Good  morning  to  you,  Mr.  William  Bunce." 

"Knowed  you'd  know  me!    Yes,  I  knowed  it,"  and 


HOUSE-BUILDING  279 

Mr.  William  Bunce  rubbed  his  game  leg,  as  if  he 
thought  it  a  great  joke.  "Fixed  up  mighty  comfort- 
able here.     D'ye  allow  to  winter  here?" 

"Yes,  we  allow  to  winter  here,"  replied  Hi,  with 
some  asperity.     "What  mischief  are  you  up  to  now?" 

"See  here,  stranger,"  replied  Bunce,  "I  ain't  up  to 
no  mischief,  leastways  so  long  as  I'm  civil  spoken  to. 
It's  the  boss  of  this  ranch  I  want  to  see — Boston,  is 
it  ?"  and  the  man  looked  curiously  at  Arty's  sign.  "I 
was  told  it  was  Crowbait." 

"Who  told  you  it  was  Crowbait?"  demanded 
Barnard. 

"The  man  with  the  go-cart.  I  disremember  his 
name — Woods  ?" 

"Bush?"  . 

"That's  the  name.  I  knowed  it  war  something  to  do 
with  woods." 

"Well,  what's  your  will  with  us?"  asked  Barnard. 

The  man  fumbled  about  his  shirt,  and  took  out  a 
buckskin  bag,  in  which  was  a  handful  of  gold-dust 
and  a  greasy  wad  of  paper.  Smoothing  the  paper  on 
his  knee,  he  read  from  it  in  silence,  lifted  up  his  head, 
and  said: 

"Thar  war  a  man." 

"Well,"  said  Mont,  for  Bunce  had  stopped. 

"Whar's  the  kid?"  he  asked. 

"Who?     Johnny?" 


28o  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"That's  what  you  call  him." 

Johnny  was  called  from  the  gulch,  where  he  was  ex- 
perimenting with  pick  and  shovel.  As  soon  as  he  saw 
Bunce  he  shrunk  back  and  took  shelter  behind  Mont. 
Bunce  grinned  and  began  again: 

**Thar  war  a  man.  His  name  war  Jenness,  M.D. 
Leastways,  that  thar  war  on  his  shingle  in  Lick  Springs, 
Vermilion  County,  Illinoy.  He  had  a  widder  sister 
a-livin'  in  Ogle  County,  Illinoy,  likewise.  She  up  and 
died,  leavin'  a  little  boy.  Jenness,  M.D,,  I  allow  he 
war  the  boy's  gardeen.  He  got  the  boy.  Now  thar 
war  property — how  much  I  never  heerd  tell;  it  war 
the  kid's  if  he  lived,  and  Jenness's  if  he  didn't.  Do 
ye  begin  to  savvy  ?" 

His  listeners  nodded  assent. 

"In  course,  you  see,  then,  that  that  thar  little  kid  is 
the  boy.  Jenness,  M.D. — well,  he  ain't  no  doctor, 
leastways  not  more'n  a  boss  doctor — Jenness,  he  tole 
me  and  Eph  Mullet,  if  we'd  take  the  boy,  like  we  war 
agoin'  to  Californy,  and  get  shut  of  him  somehow,  he'd 
gin  us  our  outfit.     So  he  did." 

"And  you  got  your  California  outfit  for  promising  to 
make  away  with  this  boy,  did  you  .^"  asked  Mont,  with 
a  shudder. 

"That's  about  the  size  of  it.  But,  mind  ye,  we  only 
got  part  of  the  outfit;  it  war  only  a  matter  of  a  hun- 
dred dollars  or  so.     There  war  two  of  us." 


HOUSE-BUILDING  281 

"The  smaller  the  price,  the  meaner  you  were,"  ex- 
claimed Barney,  with  a  great  glow  of  indignation. 

"Thar  wa'n't  no  crime.  Yon's  the  kid;  I've  nothin' 
ag'in'  him.  He's  alive  and  kickin';  but  Jenness,  M.D., 
he  thinks  he's  dead." 

"Can  you  give  us  any  clue  by  which  we  can  ascer- 
tain this  boy's  parentage?"  asked  Mont. 

"Which  .''"  said  the  man,  with  a  vacant  stare. 

"Can  you  tell  us  how  we  can  find  out  the  boy's  real 
name,  and  the  names  of  his  father  and  mother.'"' 

"All  I  know  is — Jenness,  M.D.,  Lick  Springs,  Ver- 
milion County,  Illinoy.  Kid's  mother  was  in  Ogle 
County,  some  such  name  as  Brownbecker " 

"Bluebaker!"  exclaimed  Hi. 

"You've  struck  it,  stranger.  Bluebaker  is  the 
word.    I  know'd  it  had  a  blue  or  a  brown  onto  it." 

More  than  this  they  could  not  extract  from  Bunce. 
His  information  was  limited,  or  he  was  determined  to 
tell  no  more.  Here  was  enough  to  begin  an  inquiry 
upon,  at  any  rate.  Johnny  had  never  heard  the  name 
of  Bluebaker.  He  had  been  called  "Johnny"  always. 
He  was  not  at  all  moved  when  Arty  said  that  he  might 
become  heir  to  something  handsome,  by  and  by. 

Bunce  listened  to  the  questions  and  comments  of 
the  party,  and  then  began  again. 

"Thar  war  a  boss." 

He  paused,  but  nobody  made  reply,  and  he  went  on: 

"A  yaller  boss." 


282  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

*'A  sorrel,"  corrected  Barney,  **with  a  raw-hide 
braided  halter  about  his  neck."  And  here  he  drew  that 
article  of  horse-gear  from  a  heap  of  stuff  on  the  ground. 

The  man's  eyes  flashed  recognition  when  he  saw  the 
reata,  and  Barnard  continued: 

"This  was  on  the  sorrel  horse  which  was  ridden  into 
our  camp  near  Thousand  Spring  Valley,  and  the  man 
that  was  shot  off  that  horse  had  another  just  like  it 
around  our  Old  Jim's  neck.    He  was  a  horse-thief." 

The  man  never  winced.  He  said:  ''Stranger,  that 
yaller  boss  war  mine." 

"How  came  he  in  our  camp  ?" 

"He  war  stole  from  me  in  Echo  Canon.  I  tracked 
him  into  Salt  Lake  City;  thar  I  lost  him." 

"How  did  you  know  we  knew  anything  about  him  V 
asked  Mont. 

The  man  turned  uneasily  on  the  stump  where  he  sat 
and  said:  "The  go-cart  man  told  me  you  had  a  yaller 
boss." 

"So  we  had." 

"Had?" 

''Yes,  had,"  answered  Barney,  impatiently.  "That 
yellow  horse,  as  you  call  him,  was  drowned  in  Seven 
Mile  Canon  on  the  day  of  the  great  cloud-burst." 

The  man  slowly,  as  if  in  a  deep  thought,  rolled  up 
his  greasy  and  crumpled  paper,  put  in  it  his  buck- 
skin pouch,  drew  the  strings  tight,  put  it  in  his  bosom, 
stood  up,  and  said: 


HOUSE-BUILDING  283 

"Powerful  nice  weather  we're  havin'  now.  Sure 
about  that  yaller  hoss  ?" 

"Sure.  He  was  drowned  with  half  of  Rose's  cattle," 
said  Mont. 

The  man  turned  to  go,  gathering  up  his  pack  with 
an  air  of  deep  dejection. 

"Give  us  that  paper!"  said  Arty,  eagerly. 

"Oh,  yes,  let  us  have  the  memorandum,"  said  Mont. 
"It  will  help  us  find  out  what  we  want  to  know  about 
Johnny." 

"It's  got  writin'  onto  the  other  side  of  it,"  said  Bill 
Bunce.  "Private  writin'  that  I  can't  spare  to  give 
away.  Write  down  what  I've  told  ye — Jenness,  M.D., 
Lick  Springs,  Vermilion  County,  Illinoy.  Kid's 
mother  was  a  Brownpecker.    Ogle  County,  likewise." 

"And  that's  the  way  you  leave  this  matter,  after 
you  have  confessed  that  you  agreed,  for  money,  to 
put  this  Httle  chap  out  of  the  way,"  said  Barney, 
bitterly. 

The  man  turned  and  looked  at  him  with  a  dim  gleam 
of  fire  in  his  bleary  eye,  and  said,  "What  are  ye  goin' 
to  do  about  it  ?" 

So  saying,  he  stumped  along  the  trail,  perpetually 
rolling  over  on  one  side,  as  if  to  pick  up  something 
which  he  as  continually  changed  his  mind  not  to  take. 
And  so  he  rocked  irresolutely  out  of  sight. 


CHAPTER  XXI 

AN    EXPEDITION,    AND   WHAT   CAME    OF    IT 

Winter  came  suddenly.  Early  in  November,  the 
boys,  climbing  the  long  hill  near  their  camp,  could  see 
that  the  sharp  peaks  of  the  Sierra,  to  the  eastward, 
were  covered  with  snow.  The  lower  hills,  or  foot-hills, 
where  they  lived,  were  brown  and  sere;  and  looking 
westward,  the  Sacramento  Valley  was  golden  yellow 
in  the  warm  sunlight,  or  violet  and  purple,  streaked 
with  gray,  as  the  cloudy  days  came  on.  There  were 
one  or  two  rainy  days,  during  which  the  creek  rose 
rapidly,  and  the  young  miners  improved  the  oppor- 
tunity to  wash  out  a  good  deal  of  loose  dirt  from  their 
claim.  Then  came  a  sharp  frost.  The  hills  between 
the  camp  and  the  high  Sierra  were  white  with  snow, 
save  where  the  tall  pines  stood  in  solemn  rows  up  and 
down  these  billowy  slopes. 

One  morning,  Arthur,  shivering  with  cold  and  gaping 
with  a  great  show  of  sleepiness,  sat  up  in  his  bunk,  and 
looking  over  to  the  window,  which  was  only  partly 
shielded  by  a  bit  of  canvas,  exclaimed:  "Halloo,  boys  ! 

it's  snowing!" 

284 


AN  EXPEDITION  285 

They  looked  out  and  saw  that  the  ground  had  disap- 
peared beneath  a  soft,  fleecy  mantle.  Woolly  rolls  of 
snow  hung  on  the  edges  of  the  cradle  by  the  creek. 
The  pine-boughs  bent  under  their  moist  burden,  and 
the  cow  stood  chewing  her  cud  disconsolately  under 
the  shelter  of  a  big  hemlock  tree  near  the  cabin. 

Mont  looked  grave,  and  said:  "I  must  start  for 
Nye's  Ranch  this  very  day." 

Now  Nye's  Ranch  was  at  the  junction  of  the  Yuba 
and  Feather  rivers,  fifty  miles  away.  It  was  the  near- 
est depot  for  supplies,  though  a  trading-post  had  been 
opened  at  Inskip,  twenty  miles  northeast  from  Crow- 
bait  Gulch.  But  the  Inskip  trader  brought  his  goods 
from  Nye's  Ranch,  and  his  prices  were  enormous. 
Besides  this,  the  company  of  Mexicans  at  Greaser- 
town  had  promised  to  pay  three  hundred  dollars,  in 
gold-dust,  for  the  ox  and  cow,  the  survivors  of  the 
teams  of  the  young  emigrants;  and  part  of  the  bargain 
included  the  delivery  of  the  cattle  to  the  purchasers. 

It  had  been  agreed  that  Mont  should  go  to  Nye's 
Ranch,  riding  Old  Jim,  and  deliver  the  cattle  at  Greas- 
ertown  on  his  way  down.  The  Spanish  cattle  of  the 
country  were  thought  good  enough  to  slaughter  for 
fresh  beef.  American  cattle  were  too  valuable  to  be 
killed.  It  was  more  economical  to  sell  them  and  buy 
the  meat  needed  for  winter  supplies.  Flour,  bacon, 
beans,   and   dried    apples   were   required   from   Nye's 


286  THE   BOY   EMIGRANTS 

Ranch;  and  it  was  decided  that  no  more  time  should  be 
5ost  in  getting  them.  Mont  could  drive  the  cattle 
down  the  creek  and  get  the  money  and  push  on  into 
the  valley,  buy  the  provisions,  and  pack  them  home 
on  Old  Jim. 

The  snow  disappeared  before  the  sun  when  it  came 
out,  that  afternoon;  and  when  Mont  started  on  his 
journey,  which  was  not  until  the  next  morning,  the  air 
was  clear  and  bracing,  and  the  sky  was  brilliant  with 
sunlight.  The  boys  saw  him  ride  down  the  winding 
trail  with  real  sorrow,  for  he  drove  before  him  their 
old  friends,  Molly  and  Star.  These  faithful  creatures 
had  been  their  sole  reliance  during  the  latter  part  of 
their  journey;  and  though  the  cattle  were  no  longer 
useful  to  them,  now  that  they  were  camped  for  the 
winter,  it  was  hard  to  part  with  them.  If  it  had  not 
been  hard,  Mont  would  have  begun  his  journey  to 
Nye's  Ranch  much  earlier.  As  it  was,  Arty  and 
Johnny  looked  down  the  trail  with  tearful  eyes,  when 
Mont,  turning  in  his  saddle,  shouted  back:  "Don't  eat 
up  all  the  gold  while  I  am  gone." 

Even  Mont  was  a  little  heavy  at  the  heart  when  he 
finally  left  the  cattle  at  Greasertown,  and  rode  away 
with  his  gold-dust  stowed  in  a  belt  about  his  waist 
and  under  his  flannel  shirt.  He  had  a  long  and  soli- 
tary ride  before  him;  he  was  loaded  with  what  seemed 
to  him  a  great  deal  of  money,  and,  for  the  first  time 


AN  EXPEDITION  287 

since  leaving  Council  Bluffs,  he  was  separated  from  his 
comrades. 

The  rocky  trail  soon  left  the  creek  and  entered  a 
wagon-track,  which,  though  it  now  seemed  like  a 
novelty  of  civilization  to  Mont,  who  had  been  living 
in  the  woods,  was  not  so  broad  a  trail  as  that  in  which 
he  had  travelled  across  the  continent.  His  spirits  rose 
as  Old  Jim  loped  gallantly  on  the  trail,  jingling  the 
slender  camp  equipage  tied  behind  the  saddle,  as  he 
went.  The  air  was  absolutely  hushed,  and  the  wintry 
sun  rained  down  its  needles  of  light  into  motionless 
clumps  of  pines  and  spruces  grouped  in  the  narrow 
valley.  On  either  side  the  hills  rose  up  sharp  and  clear 
in  outline  against  the  sky,  their  rocky  ridges  dotted 
with  a  few  trees  along  their  lofty  crowns.  Occasion- 
ally a  hare  darted  across  the  trail  and  was  lost  in  the 
tangled  ferns,  or  a  gray  gopher,  with  tail  on  end, 
drifted  along  ahead,  like  a  leaf  blown  by  the  wind,  and 
suddenly  disappeared.  A  blue  jay  screamed  and 
scolded  from  the  tall  top  of  a  madroiia-tree,  and  a 
solitary  crow,  flapping  its  way  through  the  crystal  at- 
mosphere overhead,  croaked  and  cawed,  and  then 
seemed  to  melt  away  into  the  hills  of  brown  and  green. 

Just  before  Scotchman's  Valley  opens  out  into  the 
valley  of  the  Sacramento,  the  walls  on  either  side  rise 
up  to  a  great  height.  On  the  south  the  ridge  is  over 
two  thousand  feet  high,  and  is  very  steep  and  rugged, 


288  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

except  at  a  point  near  the  base,  where  the  sharp  de- 
scent widens  out  into  a  shoulder,  or  bench.  On  this 
bench,  about  two  hundred  feet  from  the  bottom,  were 
perched  two  or  three  miners'  cabins.  Mont,  when  he 
reached  this  spot,  looked  at  the  cabins  as  he  rode  down 
the  trail,  and,  wondering  why  the  builders  had  chosen 
such  a  lofty  spot  for  their  homes,  was  tempted  to  climb 
the  narrow  trail  and  ask  for  lodging  for  the  night,  for 
it  was  now  late  in  the  day.  But,  reflecting  that  people 
in  these  parts  were  unprepared  to  take  in  strangers, 
though  all  were  hospitable,  he  went  on  through  the 
narrow  pass,  entered  a  round,  flat  valley  which  dropped 
gently  to  the  west,  and,  between  the  openings  in  the 
groves  of  live-oaks,  he  saw  the  Sacramento  Vallej^, 
laced  with  streams;  Sutter's  Buttes,  a  noble  group  of 
mountains,  in  the  midst;  and  far  away  the  sharp  sum- 
mits of  the  Coast  Range,  pink  and  white  against  the 
evening  sky. 

The  young  man  made  his  lonely  camp  in  a  clump  of 
dwarf  pines,  as  night  came  on,  and  built  his  fire, 
toasted  his  bacon,  made  a  pot  of  coflPee,  and,  slicing  off 
a  cut  from  the  loaf  which  careful  Arthur  had  put  up 
for  him,  he  ate  his  frugal  supper,  with  loving  thoughts 
of  the  boys  at  home.  The  New  England  home  seemed 
too  far  away  now  to  be  so  much  in  his  thoughts  as  the 
rude  hut  on  the  brink  of  Chaparral  Creek;  and  as 
Mont  hugged  himself  in  his  warm  blanket,  to  sleep  be- 


AN  EXPEDITION  289 

neath  the  frosty  sky,  Barney  Crogan,  Hi,  and  the  boys 
came  and  went  in  his  dreams. 

Following  the  course  of  the  Feather  and  Yuba 
rivers,  the  streams  of  trade  and  travel,  which  had  al- 
ready begun  to  move  in  this  new  land,  met  on  a  flat 
and  willow-grown  angle  where  Nye's  Ranch  had  been 
built.  Here  the  Rio  de  las  Plumas,  or  Feather  River, 
received  the  Yuba  River,  and  flowed  on  to  join  the 
Sacramento.  Here,  once  a  week,  came  a  small  steam- 
boat from  Sacramento,  some  fifty  or  sixty  miles  to  the 
southward;  and  here  were  two  or  three  trading-posts, 
built  of  sycamore  logs  and  roofed  over  with  canvas. 

Mont  had  struggled  across  a  wet  and  muddy  plain, 
intersected  with  a  labyrinth  of  small  sloughs  and 
streams.  He  found  the  little  settlement  a  rude  and 
noisy  place.  The  ground  was  cut  up  with  the  tracks 
of  many  wagons,  and  trampled  into  a  sticky  paste  by 
the  feet  of  innumerable  mules,  whose  braying  filled 
the  air.  Miners,  red-shirted  and  rough-bearded,  were 
coming  and  going.  The  traders  were  excitedly  rushing 
about,  selHng  their  goods  and  sweeping  in  the  gold- 
dust.  This  precious  stuff  was  weighed  in  scales,  after 
being  rudely  fingered  over  on  the  board  counter,  to 
scan  the  grains  separately;  and  Mont  was  amazed  to 
see  how  carelessly  the  gold  was  handled.  Apparently, 
there  was  no  coin  or  paper  money,  but  everybody  had 
a  buckskin  pouch  or  a  canvas  shot-bag,  in  which  the 


290  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

golden  dust  was  kept.  Now  and  again  some  man  from 
"the  Bay,"  as  San  Francisco  was  called,  exhibited  a 
huge  rude  coin,  valued  at  fifty  dollars,  and  popularly 
known  as  a  "slug."  This  was  stamped  with  the  name 
of  the  firm  who  issued  it,  and  very  readily  passed  for 
the  amount  it  represented. 

The  little  plaza,  about  which  the  settlement  was  flung 
like  a  strange  and  tangled  dream,  was  crowded  with 
men,  wagons,  cattle,  and  mules.  A  few  miserable  In- 
dians, squatted  around  a  big  sycamore,  looked  on  with- 
out manifesting  the  least  interest  in  the  scene;  and  a 
grizzly  bear,  caged  in  a  canvas-covered  inclosure,  or 
corral,  and  exhibited  for  one  dollar  a  sight,  added  to  the 
confusion  by  uttering  an  occasional  howl.  A  tent, 
with  "Freeman's  Express"  painted  on  its  roof,  first 
attracted  Mont's  attention,  and  to  that  he  straight- 
way bent  his  steps.  The  boys  had  sent  letters  down  to 
Sacramento  by  various  ways,  and  Mont  now  deposited 
another  lot,  one  of  which,  written  to  Farmer  Stevens, 
in  Richardson,  lUinois,  gave  him  the  points  of  Bill 
Bunce's  story  about  Johnny,  and  besought  him  to 
look  up  the  case,  if  possible. 

The  tent  was  crowded  with  men  inquiring  for 
"letters  from  the  States."  There  was  no  post-office 
here,  but  the  accommodating  expressman,  in  con- 
sideration of  a  few  dollars'  worth  of  dust,  would  take  a 
list  of  names,  send  it  to  San  Francisco,  and  bring  up 


AN  EXPEDITION  291 

the  letters  of  people  who  made  Nye's  Ranch  their 
trading-point.  Miners  far  back  among  the  hills  sent  to 
the  Ranch  by  their  comrades  or  nearest  neighbors,  and, 
in  course  of  time,  their  precious  letters,  sifting  through 
many  hands,  sought  them  out,  and  brought  them  tid- 
ings from  home. 

There  were  no  letters  for  the  boys  at  Crowbait. 
They  had  expected  none,  as  their  list  of  names  had  been 
sent  to  Sacramento.  With  a  homesick  and  lonely 
feeling,  Mont  made  his  purchases  as  soon  as  possible, 
loaded  them  on  Old  Jim,  and  made  his  way  out  of  the 
muddy  and  disagreeable  little  settlement.  The  sky 
was  dark  and  lowering,  and  the  sharp  white  peaks  of 
the  Sierra  were  lost  in  a  gray  mist,  as  he  laboriously 
picked  his  way  across  the  plain  and  camped  for  the 
night  with  a  hospitable  herdsman  on  the  edge  of  Butte 
Creek. 

When  he  resumed  his  journey,  next  day,  the  air  was 
raw  and  chilly;  a  slate-colored  cloud  closed  over  the 
foot-hills,  and  a  mild  but  exasperating  drizzle  pervaded 
the  plain  as  he  left  it  and  began  to  ascend  the  undula- 
tions which  here  seem  like  a  ground-swell,  and,  higher 
up,  break  into  the  tumultuous  waves  of  the  Sierra. 

Mont  pushed  on  impatiently,  riding  when  the  trail 
was  easy,  and  leading  his  loaded  steed  where  the  way 
was  steep  and  rough.  Both  horse  and  man  were  in 
haste  to  get  home.     Mont  grew  feverish  and   appre- 


292  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

hensive  as  he  saw  the  snow  beginning  to  fall  heavily, 
while  he  was  yet  only  on  his  second  day  from  Nye's 
Ranch.  And  when  he  camped  that  night  in  the  man- 
zanita  bushes,  it  was  with  great  difficulty  that  he  could 
kindle  a  fire.  But  he  found  a  partly  screened  spot, 
where  the  snow  sifted  lightly  in,  and  where  he  could 
camp  in  comparative  comfort.  Jim  was  relieved  of  his 
load,  and  tied  in  a  clump  of  trees  which  sheltered  him; 
and  Mont  slept  as  best  he  could,  and  this  was  not 
sleeping  well.  His  feet  were  sore  with  the  chafing  of 
a  pair  of  new  boots,  put  on  when  he  left  the  trading- 
post,  and  now  soaked  with  melting  snow. 

Next  day,  after  Jim  had  browsed  among  the  bushes, 
and  Mont  had  swallowed  a  little  hot  coffee,  they  strug- 
gled on  together,  though  the  horse  was  now  obliged  to 
wallow  in  a  deep  mass  of  snow,  and  Mont  desperately 
kept  up  by  his  side. 

Passing  laboriously  through  the  round  valley  where 
he  had  made  his  first  night's  camp,  Mont  entered  the 
rocky  jaws  of  Scotchman's  Valley.  The  day  was  well 
advanced,  but  the  sky  was  dark  with  storm.  Overhead, 
the  air  was  thick  as  with  a  drifting  whirl  of  snow.  The 
black-green  trees  by  the  trail  were  half  hidden  and 
loaded  with  the  snow.  All  trace  of  the  route  had  van- 
ished from  the  ground,  and  only  a  few  landmarks, 
which  Mont's  practised  eye  had  noted  as  he  rode  down 
the  trail,  served  to  show  the  way  in  which  he  should 


AN   EXPEDITION  293 

go.  There  was  the  high,  steep  southern  wall  of  the 
canon,  and  there  were  the  three  cabins  on  the  bench 
below  the  upper  edge.  Poor  Mont  noted  in  the  blind- 
ing storm  the  blue  smoke  curling  from  the  chimneys 
of  the  cabins,  and  he  longed  to  be  by  the  cheerful  fire- 
side which  he  pictured  to  himself  was  within.  Like 
showers  of  feathers,  moist  and  large,  the  flakes  fell, 
and  fell  continually.  Mont's  feet  were  wet  and  sore  and 
lame.  Once  and  again  he  paused  in  his  struggles  and 
eyed  the  dismal  sight  around  him,  half-wondering  if 
he  should  ever  get  through.  The  hapless  horse  panted 
beneath  his  burden,  groaning  as  his  master  dragged  him 
on  through  the  drifts.  Once,  Mont,  with  numb  fingers, 
untied  the  thongs  that  bound  part  of  the  load;  then, 
passionately  crying  aloud,  **No!  no!  I  can't  lose 
these  provisions  !"  he  made  them  fast  again  and  labored 
onward. 

He  was  now  well  up  the  cafion.  Just  opposite  him 
were  the  cabins,  and,  as  he  looked  up  at  them,  the  air 
began  to  clear.  The  snow  fell  only  in  scattered  flakes, 
and  the  clouds  showed  signs  of  breaking  away.  Before 
him,  however,  the  way  looked  even  more  hopeless  than 
when  it  had  been  concealed  by  the  falling  storm.  Be- 
hind, a  few  ragged,  fading  tracks  showed  where  man 
and  horse  had  struggled  on  in  the  drift. 

Suddenly,  a  low  and  far-ofF  moan  broke  on  the 
deathly  stillness  of  the  air.     Mont,  scared  and  half- 


294  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

delirious  with  excitement  and  fatigue,  looked  up  to- 
ward the  southern  wall  of  the  defile.  The  mountain- 
top  seemed  to  be  unloosed  and  falling  over  into  the 
valley.  The  whole  side  of  the  ridge  appeared  broken 
off,  and  as  it  glided  swiftly  down,  Mont  noted  with 
fascinated  minuteness  of  observation,  that  a  broad 
brown  furrow  showed  behind  it  where  the  earth  was 
laid  bare.  Down  rushed  the  mighty  avalanche.  The 
whole  defile  seemed  to  shut  up  like  the  covers  of  a 
book.  In  a  twinkling  the  three  poor  little  cabins  were 
wiped  out  as  with  a  wet  sponge.  The  pallid  mass 
swept  on  with  a  roar,  its  huge  arms  flying  up  toward 
the  skies.  It  was  not  so  much  a  wall  of  snow  as  a  re- 
sistless torrent,  broad  and  deep.  The  young  man  stood 
still,  his  heart  ceased  to  beat;  yet  he  stood  and  gazed, 
unable  to  flee,  as  the  avalanche  thundered  down  from 
bench  to  bench,  struck  the  bottom  of  the  canon,  and 
spread  out  in  a  confused  mass  of  whiteness.  In  an 
instant,  horse  and  man  vanished  in  a  waste  of  snow. 
The  narrow  valley  was  filled,  and  only  here  and  there, 
where  an  uprooted  tree  or  a  fragment  of  a  wrecked 
cabin  showed  above  the  snow,  was  there  anything  to 
break  the  utter  desolation. 


CHAPTER  XXII 

PRIVATION    AND    DELIVERANCE 

"I  ALLOW  this  is  dreffle  disagreeable,"  said  Hi. 
"Mont's  been  gone  eight  days;  nothin'  in  the  house 
to  eat,  and  no  neighbors  within  ten  miles,  so  far's  we 
know." 

"And  I'm  powerfully  hungry,"  chimed  in  Tom,  who 
never  missed  an  opportunity  to  make  a  complaint. 

"I  wouldn't  mind,"  said  Arty,  once  more  going  to 
the  door  and  looking  down  the  snow-covered  trail. 
"I  wouldn't  mind,  if  we  only  knew  Mont  was  safe 
somewhere." 

Barney  grumbled  and  said  that  it  served  them  right 
for  letting  Mont  go  down  into  the  valley  alone.  They 
were  fools,  he  thought,  for  having  stayed  so  high  up 
among  the  mountains  during  the  winter.  If  they  had 
gone  out  when  Mont  went  to  Nye's  Ranch,  and  had 
stayed  out,  they  never  should  have  seen  any  snow. 
There  was  no  snow  in  the  valley;  and  miners  were 
"making  money  hand  over  fist"  down  on  the  American 
and  the  Stanislaus  rivers. 

"Yes,    yer    hindsight    is    fust-rate,    Crogan;    but    I 

29s 


296  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

wouldn't  give  much  for  yer  foresight,"  snarled  Hi,  who 
was  chafing  under  this  long  and  enforced  idleness. 

Barney,  without  a  word,  took  his  gun  and  went  out  in 
the  snow  to  hunt  rabbits.  There  was  neither  flour  nor 
meat  in  the  cabin;  but  there  was  a  plenty  of  coffee, 
some  sugar,  and  a  few  beans.  There  was  no  immediate 
danger  of  starvation.  Even  at  the  worst,  a  few  rabbits 
and  squirrels  could  be  snared  or  shot  in  the  under- 
brush; and  Arty  had  found  that  by  crushing  the  dry 
berries  of  the  manzanita,  which  still  hung  on  the 
bushes,  a  very  palatable  sort  of  flour  could  be  made. 
Barnard  announced  his  intention  of  starving  before 
he  would  eat  such  a  mess,  though  Arthur  argued  that 
the  Indians  ate  it  and  grew  fat  on  it. 

"But  I'm  not  a  Digger,"  was  his  brother's  con- 
clusive answer.     "I'll  starve  first." 

Matters  looked  even  worse  and  more  gloomy,  four 
days  after,  when  there  was  still  no  sign  of  Mont.  Three 
of  the  boys.  Hi,  Barnard,  and  Arthur,  went  down  the 
trail  as  far  as  Greasertown,  anxiously  looking  for  traces 
of  their  absent  comrade.  Greasertown  was  deserted. 
The  six  Mexicans  who  had  lived  there  had  packed  up 
their  light  luggage  and  gone  to  parts  unknown.  On 
the  rafters  of  their  solitary  cabin  were  placed  two  rude 
jig-saws,  showing  that  the  men  intended  to  return. 
Drifts  of  snow  were  on  the  puncheon  floor,  and  the 
wind  sighed  mournfully  through  the  half-chinked  walls 


PRIVATION  AND   DELIVERANCE       297 

of  the  log  cabin.  A  lonesome-looking  chipmunk  gazed 
at  the  intruders,  as  he  sat  upright  in  the  window-sill; 
then  he  uttered  a  little  exclamation  of  disgust  and  dis- 
appeared. 

*' Yer  might  have  shot  him,"  muttered  Hi,  as  he  took 
up  a  junk  bottle  which  had  been  used  for  a  candle- 
stick, and  thoughtfully  put  his  nose  to  its  mouth. 

''What  does  it  smell  of.?"  asked  Barnard,  with  some 
sharpness. 

''Don't  know,"  replied  Hi.  "I  was  a-thinkin'  that  I 
might  eat  this  'ere  taller  droppings,  if  the  mice  hadn't 
been  before  me." 

Barney  laughed,  in  spite  of  himself. 

"Why,  Hi,  we  are  not  so  badly  off  as  all  that  comes 
to  yet.  We  needn't  eat  tallow  candles,  like  the  Es- 
quimaux.    We  can  live  on  rabbits,  you  know." 

"There's  no  fat  on  rabbits,  and  I  must  say  I'm  just 
a-pinin'  for  somethin'  fat,"  rejoined  poor  Hi. 

They  had  not  even  candles  in  their  own  cabin;  but 
as  they  sat  that  night  around  the  cheerful  blaze  of 
their  fire,  Hi  acknowledged  that  it  was  far  better 
to  have  fat  pine-knots  to  burn  than  fat  candles  to 
eat. 

After  all,  the  great  burden  on  their  spirits  was  Mont's 
mysterious  absence.  If  they  could  only  be  sure  that  he 
was  safe  and  well,  they  would  be  happy.  At  least,  that 
was  what  Barnard  and  Arthur  said,  over  and  over  again. 


298  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"How  much  money  did  Mont  have,  all  told?"  de- 
manded Hi. 

"Let's  see,"  said  Arty,  reckoning  on  his  fingers; 
"there  was  the  three  hundred  he  got  for  the  cattle, 
one  hundred  you  gave  him  to  send  home  for  you,  two 
hundred  Barney  and  I  sent  off  by  him,  and  two  hun- 
dred of  his  own  for  his  mother.  Why,  that's  eight 
hundred  dollars  altogether!" 

"Eight  hundred  dollars  wuth  of  dust,  and  a  hoss 
wuth  nigh  onto  two  hundred  more,  if  he  is  old  Crow- 
bait.     That's  a  good  haul." 

"What  do  you  mean.  Hi.?"  demanded  Barney, 
starting  up  with  an  angry  face. 

"What  do  I  mean?"  replied  the  other  doggedly. 
"I  mean  that  it's  a  good  haul  for  a  feller  to  get  away 
with.    That's  what  I  mean." 

"Do  you  mean  to  insinuate  that  Mont  has  gone  off 
with  our  property,  you  confounded  sneak?"  and  Bar- 
ney advanced  toward  Hi  with  sparkling  eyes. 

"I  don't  mean  to  insinerwate  nothin'  again'  nobody, 
Barney  Crogan.  So  keep  yer  temper.  Ye'll  need  it 
bumbye  to  keep  from  starvin'.  If  some  highway  rob- 
ber has  corralled  Mont  with  his  dust,  that  would  be  a 
good  haul  for  somebody,  wouldn't  it?" 

"But  there  are  no  highway  robbers  about  these 
parts.  We  have  never  heard  of  anything  being  stolen 
anywhere,  though  people  leave  their  stuff  lying  around 
loose  everywhere." 


PRIVATION  AND  DELIVERANCE       299 

Nevertheless,  as  Barney  said  this,  he  sat  down  with  a 
sore  feeHng  in  his  heart.  After  all,  they  did  not  know 
much  about  Mont.  The  old  joke  about  his  "store 
clothes"  was  still  a  tender  subject  in  the  camp,  and  Hi's 
unworthy  suspicions  found  a  lodgment  in  Barney's 
mind,  though  his  eyes  filled  with  angry  tears  when  he 
tried  to  think  better  of  his  old  comrade.  He  struggled 
weakly  against  the  cruel  thoughts  that  rose  in  his 
mind.  Then  he  reflected  that  the  spare  and  unnatural 
diet  to  which  they  had  been  confined  lately  had  re- 
duced the  moral  tone  of  the  camp.  The  young  fellow 
rose  and  looked  vacantly  out  of  the  little  loop-hole  in 
their  canvas-covered  window.  The  prospect  without 
was  not  cheerful.  The  river  was  frozen  over;  the 
ground  was  white,  and  the  sky  was  gray. 

"Oh,  well,"  said  Arty,  cheerily,  "Mont  is  sure  to 
come  back.  He's  snow-bound,  somewhere,  I'm  sure. 
Perhaps  Old  Jim  gave  out,  and  he  had  to  lie  by  some- 
where until  he  got  better." 

"Prfhaps,"  said  Hi,  with  a  marked  emphasis. 

"And  then,"  went  on  the  boy,  without  noticing  Hi's 
interruption,  "we  are  bound  to  get  through  this  some- 
how.   As  Mont  used  to  say,  I  feel  it  in  my  bones." 

"Yes,"  said  Tom,  with  scorn,  "more  bones  than 
meat." 

"Shut  yer  mouth,  you,  Tom !"  broke  in  his  brother, 
angrily. 


300  THE   BOY   EMIGRANTS 

"Besides,"  added  Arty,  "mother  used  to  say" — and 
the  boy's  voice  quavered  a  Httle — "that  the  Lord  will 
provide." 

"I  don't  know,"  said  Barney,  gloomily,  from  the 
window.     "It  seems  as  if  the  Lord  had  gone  off." 

Arthur  gave  his  brother  a  scared  look,  and  re- 
monstrated, with  tears  in  his  eyes,  "Oh,  don't, 
Barney !" 

That  night,  for  almost  the  fiftieth  time  since  Mont 
had  been  gone.  Hi  lifted  the  puncheons  of  the  floor  in 
one  corner  of  the  cabin,  scraped  away  the  soil,  and 
dragged  out  the  can  of  gold-dust  which  formed  the 
common  stock.  He  smoothed  it  over,  lovingly,  in  his 
hands,  and  let  it  drop  back  into  the  can  with  a  sharp 
rattle. 

"It's  a  heap  of  money,"  he  said,  with  a  sigh.  " 'T 
would  buy  a  farm  in  Illinoy." 

"But  it  won't  buy  a  pound  of  side-meat  in  Crowbait 
Gulch,"  said  Barney,  with  some  ill-humor. 

"Nary  time,"  replied  Hiram.  "What's  the  use  of 
gold  if  yer  can't  buy  nothin'  with  it  ^  Yer  can't  eat  it, 
can't  drink  it,  can't  wear  it" — and,  as  if  trying  the 
experiment,  he  took  up  a  bright  lump  and  bit  it. 
"Blame  the  contemptible  yaller  stuff!"  said  Hi,  with  a 
sudden  burst  of  rage.  "What's  the  good  of  it  now?" 
— and  he  tossed  it  into  the  fire. 

The  golden  nugget  struck  the  back  of  the  fire-place 


PRIVATION  AND   DELIVERANCE       301 

and  dropped  into  the  blaze,  as  if  astonished  at  its  rude 
treatment. 

Arty,  with  much  concern,  attempted  to  poke  it  out, 
but  Barnard  said: 

"Let  it  be;  you  can  poke  it  out  to-morrow,  when  Hi 
and  the  ashes  have  both  cooled  off." 

Johnny,  from  his  bunk,  had  looked  on  this  curious 
scene  with  much  amazement.  He  did  not  exactly 
understand  why  Hi,  who  usually  was  the  greediest  for 
gold,  should  now  throw  a  piece  into  the  fire.  Then,  why 
did  he  bite  at  it .?  He  might  have  known  that  gold 
was  not  good  to  eat,  and  he  had  no  business  to  throw 
it  away  like  that  when  he  found  that  he  could  not 
bite  it.  Then  the  lad  remembered  Mont's  last  words, 
"Don't  eat  up  all  the  gold  while  I  am  gone!"  It  was 
very  strange.  So,  thinking  of  Mont,  and  wondering 
if  he  would  ever  come  back  again,  Johnny  turned  his 
face  against  the  rough  wall  of  the  cabin  and  softly  cried 
himself  to  sleep. 

Next  day,  the  sun  rose  so  brightly  and  so  clear  that 
the  little  valley  was  deluged  with  an  intense  brightness 
almost  painful  to  the  eyes.  Barnard  awoke,  and 
sitting  up  in  his  bunk,  half-wondered  what  it  was  that 
had  troubled  him  so  much  when  he  went  to  sleep. 
Then  he  suddenly  remembered  the  privations  and 
dangers  of  their  situation;  and  he  took  up  his  burden  of 
anxiety  with  a  dull  feeling  of  pain. 


302  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

Arthur  was  already  punching  up  the  embers,  and, 
with  a  Httle  laugh,  he  poked  out  the  lump  of  gold 
which  Hi  had  tossed  there  the  night  before.  "Ouch  !" 
he  exclaimed,  as  he  dropped  it  to  the  floor,  "it's  hot 
as  blazes !" 

"Hard  to  get  and  hard  to  hold,"  remarked  Barnard, 
soberly. 

As  the  young  miners  gathered  about  their  scanty 
breakfast,  Johnny  reminded  them  of  Mont's  last  words 
about  eating  the  gold. 

"That  was  Mont's  joke,"  said  Barney,  "but  belittle 
thought  how  near  we  should  come  to  having  nothing 
but  that  stuff  to  eat." 

Just  then  there  was  a  sound  outside,  as  of  trampling 
in  the  snow. 

"What's  that.?"  cried  Hi. 

"Grizzlies!"  shrieked  Tom;  and  everybody  rushed 
to  the  door. 

It  was  like  a  message  from  an  outer  and  far-off 
world  in  that  solitary  wilderness.  As  they  flung  wide 
open  the  door,  there  was  Mont,  limping  along  with  a 
sack  of  flour  on  his  back,  and  behind  him  was  Messer 
with  another  burden.  Mont  looked  pale  and  worn, 
but  he  cried  out,  cheerily: 

"Halloo!    Crowbaits!" 

His  comrades  crowded  about  him  to  relieve  him  of 
his  load,  shake  his  hands,  and  ask  all  manner  of  ques- 


PRIVATION  AND   DELIVERANCE       303 

tions.  All  but  Hi,  who,  with  a  great  gulp,  sat  down  on 
a  bench  and  broke  into  tears.  The  other  boys,  though 
with  moistened  eyes  and  tender  hearts,  in  this  hour 
of  their  deliverance,  looked  upon  the  tearful  Hi  with 
real  amazement. 

"What's  the  matter,  Hi  ?"  asked  Mont,  kindly  put- 
ting his  arm  on  Hi's  shoulder. 

"I  didn't  allow  I  was  so  powerful  weak,"  blubbered 
the  poor  fellow.  "I  must  have  been  hungry,  and, 
besides,  I'm  so  glad  you've  got  back,  you  can't 
think." 

Barnard's  face  clouded  for  a  moment  as  he  re- 
membered Hiram's  suspicions.     But  Hi  added: 

"And  I  thought  hard  of  you,  too.  Don't  lay  it  up 
ag  m    me ! 

"Oh,  no,"  said  Mont.  "So  long  as  you  are  all 
alive,  I  am  thankful  and  happy.  'Here  we  are  again, 
Mr.  Merryman,'  as  the  circus-man  says,"  and  the  young 
fellow  gayly  slapped  Arty's  back. 

But  Mont  was  not  in  very  good  case,  and  when  he 
told  his  story,  thej  marvelled  much  that  he  was  ahve. 
The  avalanche  in  Scotchman's  Valley  had  swept  down 
the  miners'  cabins,  but,  fortunately,  the  only  man  in 
either  of  them  had  heard  the  hum  of  the  slide  as  it 
came.  Running  out  he  dashed  into  a  tunnel  in  the 
rear  of  the  cabin,  where  his  comrades  were  at  work, 
just  in  time  to  escape  the  flying  mass  which  swept 


304  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

down  the  hill-side  and  into  the  gulch  below.  Their 
cabins  were  gone,  but  they  were  alive,  and  thankfully 
they  set  themselves  to  recovering  whatever  was  left 
of  the  wreck. 

A  dark  spot  on  the  tumultuous  surface  of  the  snow 
attracted  their  attention.     It  was  a  horse's  head. 

"Thar  must  be  a  man  whar  that's  a  boss,  you  bet," 
was  the  sage  remark  of  one  of  them.  So,  leaving  their 
own  affairs,  the  men  worked  manfully  until  they  had 
dug  out  Old  Jim,  for  it  was  he — dead  in  the  snow. 
Anxiously,  the  good  fellows  plied  their  shovels  until 
Mont,  insensible  and  nearly  suffocated,  was  dragged 
out  to  the  light.  He  was  carried  up  to  the  tunnel, 
where  a  fire,  chafing,  and  some  hot  coffee,  recalled  him 
to  consciousness.  But  his  mind  wandered,  and  he 
could  give  no  satisfactory  account  of  himself. 

"Must  be  one  of  them  Boston  fellers  up  to  Crowbait, 
just  this  side  of  Forty  Thieves,"  muttered  one  of  the 
party.  "He  looks  too  high-toned  for  one  of  the  Forty 
Thieves  folks.  Besides,  they  all  left  a  fortnight  ago; 
and  what's  he  a-doin'  down  here?"  And  the  puzzled 
miner  scratched  his  head. 

Mont  could  only  murmur,  "Don't  eat  all  the  gold 
up  ! 

Out  of  the  wreck  of  their  cabins  the  miners  soon  re- 
constructed a  comfortable  shelter.  Mont's  provisions 
were  nearly  all  found   and  put  by  for  himj  and  his 


PRIVATION  AND  DELIVERANCE       305 

rescuers  made  him,  and  themselves,  as  comfortable  as 
possible  under  the  circumstances. 

When  the  young  man,  after  a  day  or  two,  was  able 
to  sit  up  and  tell  who  he  was  and  where  he  came  from, 
he  found  himself  so  weak  and  lame  that  he  could  not 
travel.  He  moaned  over  this,  for  he  was  filled  with 
alarm  for  his  comrades,  waiting  at  home  for  food. 
More  than  a  week  was  already  gone,  and  his  feet  were 
yet  so  sore  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  move. 
He  must  go,  if  he  had  to  crawl.    The  boys  would  starve. 

His  new  friends  tried  to  persuade  him  that  his 
*'pardners"  would  be  able  to  get  along  on  the  game  of 
the  region,  and  that  it  was  more  necessary  for  him  to 
get  well  than  for  him  to  take  food  to  them.  Mont 
fretted,  and  continually  fixed  his  gaze  on  the  narrow 
caiion  entrance  through  which  he  must  struggle  on  to 
Crowbait. 

One  day,  while  looking  wistfully  out  over  the  gulch, 
he  saw  the  well-known  slouchy  figure  of  Messer  cross- 
ing on  the  snow,  now  fast  melting  away.  Messer  was 
loaded  with  pick,  pan,  and  "grub."  He  had  left  his 
wife  at  Frenchman's  Misery,  down  the  valley,  and  had 
come  up  to  join  an  old  acquaintance  in  the  hill-diggings, 
where  Mont  was  now  confined  against  his  will. 

It  was  a  fortunate  meeting.  Honest  Messer  said: 
"You  uns  was  kind  to  we  uns  on  the  Plains.  I'll  pack 
you  clean  up  to  Chaparral,  if  that'll  do  you  any  good." 

Mont  protested  that  he  could  walk;  but  he  should  be 


3o6  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

glad  for  some  assistance  with  his  load.  Messer  ex- 
pressed a  williness  to  carry  Mont  and  all  the  goods  and 
provisions  which  poor  Old  Jim  had  so  far  brought. 
So,  after  one  more  day's  rest,  the  two  men  set  out  with 
as  much  of  the  stuff  as  they  could  carry.  The  trail 
was  difficult,  but  they  managed  to  reach  Greasertown 
at  the  end  of  their  first  day.  Here  they  camped  in  the 
deserted  cabin,  and  next  day,  bright  and  early  in  the 
morning,  they  pushed  on  to  Crowbait.  Mont  had 
hoped  to  surprise  the  boys.  But  when  he  drew  near, 
and  none  came  to  meet  him,  his  heart  sank.  There 
was  no  sign  of  life  when  he  came  in  sight  of  the  cabin. 
The  sun  was  up,  but  no  smoke  issued  from  the  rude 
chimney. 

"Have  they  become  discouraged  and  gone  away?'* 
he  asked  himself,  with  growing  alarm.  Then  a  pale 
blue  wreath  of  smoke  curled  up  from  the  chimney. 
''That's  Arty!  God  bless  the  boy!"  murmured  Mont 
to  himself. 

Now  he  heard  voices  within,  and  the  door  opened. 
He  was  at  home  at  last.     All  was  well. 

"It  was  a  tight  squeak  you  uns  had  of  it,"  remarked 
Messer,  solemnly. 

Barney,  standing  behind  Arthur,  affectionately  put 
his  hands  on  the  lad's  shoulders,  and  said: 

"But  this  little  chap  reminded  us  that  the  Lord 
would  provide." 


CHAPTER  XXIII 

LUCK    IN    STREAKS 

Mont  did  not  readily  recover  from  his  sickness. 
During  the  remainder  of  that  winter,  which  yet  had 
many  privations  in  store  for  them,  he  was  infirm  in 
health.  The  boys  had  anxious  hours  and  days.  There 
was  no  physician  in  the  region;  their  own  slender  stock 
of  medicines  was  not  of  much  avail  in  a  case  of  serious 
sickness  like  this;  and  more  than  once  the  tender- 
hearted Barney,  who  could  not  endure  the  sight  of  his 
comrade  suffering  without  remedy,  went  hastily  out 
among  the  snow-covered  hills,  and,  in  the  death-like 
waste  of  the  forest,  tried  to  find  relief  for  his  pent-up 
and  sorrowful  feelings. 

It  was  not  until  the  snow  had  melted,  the  wild  geese 
had  begun  to  clamor  in  the  sky,  and  the  ripple  of  the 
creek  along  its  pebbly  bars  was  heard  once  more,  that 
Mont  fairly  recovered.  The  log  cabin  was  continually 
damp,  and  as  little  sunshine  could  pour  into  it  through 
the  winter,  it  was  not  a  good  place  for  a  sick  man. 
But  when  the  doors  and  windows  were  thrown  open 
wide,  and  the  warm  rays  of  the  early  Cahfornia  spring 

307 


3o8  THE   BOY   EMIGRANTS 

flooded  the  little  house  with  sunlight,  the  invalid  re- 
covered rapidly,  and  the  shadow  of  a  great  trouble 
passed  away  from  the  household. 

With  the  re-opening  of  the  trails  came  new  and  old 
acquaintances.  Almost  before  the  snow  had  melted 
from  the  mountains  above  them,  prospectors  came 
hunting  through  the  hills  for  gold.  Many  of  these  were 
newly  arrived  in  the  country,  and  they  had  already 
begun  to  think  that  the  gold  of  the  lower  valleys  was 
"played  out,"  and  that  the  precious  stuff  must  be 
sought  higher  up  in  the  Sierra.  Nevertheless,  all  of 
these  had  gold-dust  with  them,  which  they  handled  as 
carelessly  as  if  it  had  been  common  dirt.  Each  man 
carried  a  little  pair  of  scales  about  him,  with  which  he 
weighed  the  ore  when  he  bought  or  sold  anything;  for, 
as  yet,  there  was  no  coin  and  no  other  currency  than 
this.  With  these  emigrants,  too,  came  all  sorts  of 
queer  contrivances  for  separating  gold  from  the  earth 
in  which  it  was  found.  Machines  invented  in  "the 
States,"  or  on  board  ship,  by  men  who  had  never  seen 
the  mines,  were  carefully  brought  up  to  the  diggings 
at  great  expense,  and  then  thrown  away.  After  all, 
the  cradle,  or  rocker,  was  the  best,  simplest,  and  cheap- 
est gold-separator  then  known.  It  could  be  carried  on 
a  mule's  back,  or  a  stout  man  could  easily  pack  it  on 
his  own  back,  from  place  to  place.  So,  in  due  time,  the 
trails  to  the  mines  were  strewed  with  the  useless  con- 


LUCK  IN  STREAKS  309 

trivances   for   mining,   which   were   discarded   for   the 
homely  and  labor-saving  cradle. 

With  the  spring,  too,  came  news  from  home.  Some 
of  their  neighbors  at  Forty  Thieves  brought  up  a  pack- 
age of  priceless  letters  from  Sacramento  for  the  boys. 
Barnard  and  Arthur  did  not  think  five  dollars  too  much 
to  pay  for  a  fat  envelope  from  Sugar  Grove;  for  that 
packet  contained  a  wonderful  letter  of  many  pages,  in 
which  father,  mother,  sister,  and  each  one  of  the 
brothers  had  written  something.  It  was  a  marvellous 
production,  written  during  the  early  winter  evenings, 
and  the  two  boys  read  it  over  and  over  again  with 
almost  tearful  delight.  It  seemed  strange  to  read  in 
those  distant  solitudes  of  the  white  calf  which  had  been 
born  to  Daisy,  and  of  the  marvellous  crop  of  bell- 
flower  apples  last  year.  Barnard  put  down  the  closely 
written  pages  which  told  him  how  the  wheat  crop  had 
turned  out  in  the  ten-acre  lot,  how  the  pigs  had  been 
sold  to  Jim  Van  Orman,  and  how  Jedediah  Page  was 
married  to  Dolly  Oliver,  and  Father  Dixon  had  been 
presented  with  a  gold-headed  cane  by  the  citizens  of 
the  town.  As  the  boy  looked  away  from  these  simple 
annals  of  his  far-off  home  into  the  trackless  forests 
which  clothed  the  flanks  of  the  Sierra  Nevada,  he 
seemed  as  one  in  a  dream.  He  was  obliged  to  look 
about  him  to  be  sure  that  he  was  in  Cahfornia  and  not 
in  Illinois.    The  picture  of  the  old  homestead  at  Sugar 


3IO  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

Grove,  the  red  barn,  the  well-sweep,  the  family  about 
the  big  kitchen-table,  and  the  neighbors  dropping  in 
to  chat,  now  seemed  something  that  existed  in  some 
other  world  than  this. 

Hi  and  Tom  also  had  their  budget  of  home  news, 
which  was  none  the  less  welcome,  probably,  because  the 
handwriting  was  rugged,  and  because,  as  Hi  expressed 
it,  the  dingy  letter-paper  "smelt  confoundedly  of  ter- 
backer-smoke."  Old  man  Fender  and  his  wife  dearly 
loved  a  pipe  when  any  serious  business,  like  that  of 
letter-writing,  was  in  hand. 

Mont  went  away  by  himself  to  read  his  long,  long 
letters  from  Cambridgeport.  He  had  two  sets  of  these 
— one  in  the  stately,  erect  handwriting  of  his  mother, 
and  the  other  crowded  full  of  fine  hair-lines,  expressing, 
doubtless,  very  comfortable  sentiments,  for  the  boys 
observed  that  Mont  improved  in  spirits  whenever  he 
read  these.  The  young  man  was  always  light-hearted, 
as  of  old. 

"I  wouldn't  mind  giving  you  a  bit  of  one  of  our 
letters,  Johnny,"  said  Arty,  genially,  as  he  saw  that  the 
friendless  little  lad  looked  on  the  happy  circle  of  readers 
with  a  longing  face,  "only  I  suppose  it  wouldn't  do 
you  any  good.  You  might  'play'  that  it  was  from 
your  sister." 

"I  don't  mind  it  a  bit,"  said  Johnny,  stoutly,  "but  it 
is  sort  of  hard-like  that  I've  got  nobody  to  write  to 


LUCK   IN  STREAKS  311 

me.  Nobody,  nobody!"  and  the  lad's  eyes  filled  with 
tears,  in  spite  of  himself. 

Nevertheless,  there  was  news  about  Johnny.  Farmer 
Stevens  had  made  inquiries,  and  had  found  that  one 
Doctor  Jenness,  known  as  a  veterinary  surgeon,  other- 
wise "horse-doctor,"  lived  at  Lick  Springs,  Vermilion 
County,  and  that  his  sister,  name  unknown,  had  mar- 
ried some  years  ago,  and  had  subsequently  died  in 
Ogle  County,  leaving  a  little  son  and  some  property. 
So  much  was  already  discovered  by  way  of  a  begin- 
ning, and  the  good  man  was  sure  he  should  be  able 
to  trace  the  rest  by-and-by.  Johnny  heard  the  story 
without  much  interest.  Arty  was  excited  to  know 
that  his  father  was  on  the  track  of  Johnny's  parentage. 
It  had  been  a  great  mystery  to  him.  He  was  sure 
some  great  thing  might  happen  yet.  But  Johnny  was 
satisfied  with  his  present  condition,  and  was  at  home 
with  his  new  friends.  Beyond  these  he  had  no  concern 
whatever. 

As  soon  as  the  frost  was  out  of  the  ground,  the  boys 
went  to  work  again  with  a  hearty  good  will.  They 
had  put  their  mining  tools  in  order  during  the  winter 
leisure,  and  their  very  first  ventures  into  the  claim 
were  richly  repaid.  They  had  worked  well  up  toward 
the  upper  end  of  the  gulch,  skinning  off  the  top  soil 
and  digging  up  the  pay  dirt  next  to  the  bed-rock.  One 
day,  Mont,  who  was  manfully  tugging  away  with  his 


312  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

returning  strength,  fairly  shouted  with  delight,  as  his 
shovel  turned  up  a  broken  mass  of  gold,  shining  in  one 
magical  cluster.  The  boys  came  running,  and  stooping 
down,  with  hooked  fingers.  Hi  eagerly  clawed  out  the 
loose  earth.  There,  in  a  narrow  crevice  in  the  bed-rock, 
like  eggs  in  a  basket,  were  thirteen  lumps  of  bright, 
yellow,  solid  gold,  some  as  large  as  butternuts,  some 
smaller,  and  some  about  as  large  as  marbles.  They 
were  all  irregular  in  shape,  but  all  were  smoothly 
rounded  as  if  they  had  been  rolled  and  rolled  for  ages 
in  the  bed  of  some  swiftly  moving  stream.  The  earth 
was  closely  packed  about  them,  and  even  in  this  soft 
bed  appeared  shining  particles,  which  would  have  ex- 
cited their  expectations  if  they  had  not  now  the  great 
luck  in  their  grasp. 

"I  allow  there  must  be  at  least  fifty  thousand  dol- 
lars in  that  there  hole!"  said  Hi,  feverishly,  as  he 
fingered  the  glorious  "chispas." 

**0h.  Hi,  you're  crazy!"  broke  in  Barney.  "There 
isn't  more  than  ten  thousand  in  the  whole  lot,  if  there 
is  so  much.    Gold-dust  is  mighty  deceiving,  you  know." 

"Well,  let's  go  for  the  nest,"  said  Tom,  valiantly 
brandishing  the  pick.  "May  be  we'll  strike  another 
such  nest  deeper  down." 

But  this  was  a  vain  hope.  The  dirt  was  carefully 
scraped  out  of  the  little  hole  where  the  gold  had  been 
found.     When  washed,  it  paid  well,  though  not  in  big 


LUCK  IN  STREAKS  313 

lumps.  The  boys  dug  all  around  the  lucky  spot  with- 
out finding  any  more  rich  deposits.  Hi  left  his  rocker 
by  the  creek,  in  order  to  be  on  hand  when  the  next 
"big  strike"  was  made;  and  he  grew  fretful  as  days 
went  by  and  only  fair  wages  were  returned  for  their 
labors. 

Meantime,  loving  letters  to  the  folks  at  home  were 
written,  and  a  modest  return  of  their  first  great  luck 
was  also  sent.  The  actual  value  of  their  find,  after 
all,  was  not  nearly  so  great  as  it  had  seemed.  Gold- 
dust,  as  Barney  had  truly  said,  is  deceiving.  Their 
mine  had  yielded,  since  spring  had  opened,  ten  thou- 
sand dollars,  of  which  about  one-half  had  been  found  in 
what  Johnny  called  "the  lucky  hole." 

So,  with  the  letters  home  went  a  package  of  gold- 
dust.  Mining  operations  had  thickened  so  among  the 
mountains  that  Freeman's  Express  Company  had 
pushed  its  agencies  far  up  into  the  Sierra.  Mounted 
messengers  collected  and  delivered  letters  and  small 
parcels,  and  no  sight  in  all  the  year  was  so  welcome  to 
these  exiles  in  the  mountains  of  California  as  the  lithe 
horseman,  who,  with  his  saddle-bags  strapped  behind 
him  and  his  pistols  at  his  belt,  rode  over  the  divide  and 
plunged  into  the  gulches  where  men  were  delving  in 
the  mines.  Now  they  had  money  on  the  way  home 
— "money  in  the  bank,"  as  Hi  put  it — and  they  re- 
turned to  their  work  with  new  energy.    They  ran  nar- 


314  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

row  trenches  up  into  the  slopes  on  either  side  of  their 
claim.  They  sank  holes  in  the  edges  of  the  bank,  the 
central  portion  of  the  triangular  gulch  having  been 
carefully  worked  over.  One  day,  when  they  weighed 
up  their  gains  for  that  day's  labor,  they  found  just 
ten  dollars.  Hi  frowned,  and  said  that  "the  young- 
sters" were  getting  lazy.  Tom,  as  a  representative 
youngster,  resented  this  remark,  and  murmured  some- 
thing about  punching  Hi's  head.  Mont  interfered  in 
behalf  of  peace,  and  cheerily  reminded  them  that  there 
had  been  a  time  when  ten  dollars  was  a  good  show  for 
a  day's  work. 

"But  that  was  when  we  were  prospecting,"  said 
Barney,  ruefully  looking  at  the  meagre  little  yield  of 
gold.  "Now  we  are  supposed  to  be  in  a  paying  claim. 
Ten  dollars  a  day  is  less  than  two  dollars  a-piece." 

The  next  day's  harvest  was  twenty-two  dollars. 
The  next  was  worse  yet — only  five  dollars.  But  on 
the  third  day  they  washed  out  eighty-five  cents ! 

An  expert  from  Swell-Head  Gulch  was  called  in  to 
view  the  premises.  He  walked  over  the  ground,  spit- 
ting his  tobacco-juice  into  every  hole,  as  though  that 
were  the  magic  means  by  which  he  was  to  divine  the 
situation, — asked  a  few  questions,  and,  when  the  lucky 
find  was  described,  said,  with  great  contempt: 

"That  war  only  a  pocket." 

Then  he  scooped  up  some  of  the  earth  next  the  outer 


LUCK  IN  STREAKS  315 

edge  of  the  bed-rock  last  laid  bare,  poked  it  about  in 
the  palm  of  his  rough  hand,  with  a  knowing  air,  and 
said: 

**  Boys,  your  claim  is  played  out." 

So  saying,  he  stalked  away,  without  giving  the  matter 
a  second  thought. 

In  an  instant  almost  their  castles  in  the  air  had 
tumbled.  Barnard  sat  down  on  the  ground  in  a  most 
depressed  condition  of  mind,  saying: 

"Just  our  luck!" 

Hi  growled:  "And  we've  been  and  gone  and  sent  all 
our  money  home." 

Arty  turned  to  Mont,  and  asked  with  his  eyes: 

"Well.?" 

And  Mont  said:  "There's  only  one  thing  to  do,  boys. 
As  Bush  would  say,  we  may  as  well  'get  up  and  dust.'  " 


CHAPTER  XXIV 

WANDERING    ONCE    MORE 

When  the  boys  finally  resolved  to  leave  Crowbait 
diggings,  they  found  it  easier  to  remove  than  they  had 
thought.  Little  by  little  they  had  reduced  their  out- 
fit. The  cattle  had  been  sold,  their  horse  was  dead, 
the  tent  had  been  used  up  in  various  ways,  the  box  of 
their  wagon  made  into  trunks  and  benches,  and  the 
running  gear  traded  off  for  flour  to  a  man  who  had 
happened  that  way  early  in  the  spring.  Nevertheless, 
as  they  loaded  themselves  with  their  mining  tools  and 
slender  stock  of  provisions,  and  made  ready  to  turn 
their  backs  on  what  had  been  home  to  them,  they  could 
not  help  feeling  sad.  Since  they  had  left  the  States 
no  place  had  so  long  been  their  camp. 

But  their  preparations  for  a  tramp  were  soon  finished, 
and,  one  bright  spring  morning,  they  marched  up  the 
creek.  The  faithful  Pete,  trotting  along  at  Arty's 
heels,  was  very  much  surprised,  apparently,  at  this 
sudden  desertion  of  the  old  home. 

"Good-by,  old  Boston  !"  said  Arty,  as  they  turned  a 

bend  in  the  river  which  would  shut  the  log  cabin  from 

316 


WANDERING  ONCE   MORE  317 

view.  "Good-by!  we've  had  a  good  time  and  some 
hard  luck  with  you." 

"Good  riddance  to  old  Boston,  I  say,"  grumbled 
Tom,  who  was  staggering  along  under  the  weight  of 
sundry  pots  and  pans.  "I'm  glad  to  get  shut  of  the 
place.     Too  much  work  and  too  little  gold." 

"Oh,  shut  your  mouth  and  come  ahead,"  scolded 
Hi.  "It  appears  like  you  all  wanted  to  make  speeches 
on  the  old  shebang."  Nevertheless,  Hi  breathed  a  long 
sigh,  and  set  his  face  with  a  hard  look,  as  if  he  was 
determined  that  he  would  not  regret  leaving  their 
first  home  in  California. 

They  had  heard  of  Table  Mountain  as  being  a  very 
rich  mining  region,  and  thither  the  little  company  of 
gold-seekers  now  bent  their  steps.  Their  way  was 
along  the  foot-hills,  covered  with  verdure,  and  knee- 
deep  in  wild  flowers.  The  slopes  were  splashed  with 
great  patches  of  blue,  white,  orange,  and  yellow,  show- 
ing where  the  wild  larkspur,  heliotrope  and  poppy  grew 
in  prodigal  luxuriance.  The  pines  and  spruces  were 
spicy  with  balsamic  odors,  and  the  air  was  soft  with 
the  early  summer  heat  swept  up  from  the  Sacramento 
Valley. 

Now  and  then  they  encountered  a  party  of  miners, 
two,  three,  or  half  a  dozen,  laboriously  climbing  the 
steep  trails  which  led  among  the  hills;  and  now  and 
then  they  stumbled  on  others  who  were  working  at 


3i8  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

claims  which  they  had  taken  up  by  streams  and  in 
gulches.  But,  for  the  most  part,  the  young  lads  had 
the  country  to  themselves,  as  they  tramped  steadily 
onward  to  the  north.  It  was  a  vast  soHtude,  almost 
untrodden  by  the  foot  of  man.  The  few  prospectors 
who  came  and  went  were  soon  lost  in  the  well-nigh 
pathless  wilderness.  There  were  no  houses  to  be  seen, 
no  roads,  and  even  the  trails  which  they  crossed  oc- 
casionally seemed  to  have  been  traced  since  the  snow 
had  melted.  Gray  rabbits  bounded  out  and  in  among 
the  ferns.  Ground  squirrels  set  up  their  tails  like 
banners,  and  drifted  on  before  the  wayfarers,  and  the 
parti-colored  magpies  screamed  angrily  from  the 
bushes,  as  if  resenting  this  intrusion  of  human  strangers. 

On  the  second  day,  climbing  up  a  sharp  ridge,  late 
in  the  afternoon,  they  beheld  a  little  village  on  the 
summit  of  the  next  divide.  Between  the  ridge  and  the 
divide  was  a  wide  ravine,  through  which  ran  a  pretty 
stream,  and  all  along  its  banks  the  fresh  earth  was 
tumbled  and  heaped.  A  few  rough-hewn  beams  and 
puncheons  showed  where  men  had  been  working.  But 
no  miners  were  in  sight. 

"Those  fellows  knock  ofF  work  pretty  early  in  the 
afternoon,"  said  Barney,  as  the  party  rested  on  the 
ridge. 

"Good  diggin's  and  makin'  lots  of  money,  most 
likely,"  added  Hi. 


WANDERING  ONCE   MORE  319 

^'From  this  distance  their  camp  looks  quite  home- 
like," said  Mont,  "though  I  suppose  we  should  find  it 
mean  enough  when  we  get  into  it.  But  see  how  well 
that  double  row  of  cabins  is  set  against  the  background 
of  trees.  If  there  was  only  a  little  paint  on  some  of 
those  shanties,  it  would  look  quite  like  a  hamlet  among 
the  mountains  of  Vermont." 

"Only  you  never  see  that  nasty  red  earth  among  the 
Green  Mountains,"  added  Barnard,  with  disgust,  for 
the  natural  scenery  of  the  country  never  pleased  him. 
It  was  "foreign,"  he  said. 

The  boys  wondered  what  the  settlement  was,  and 
so,  picking  up  their  burdens,  they  scrambled  down  the 
hill-side,  waded  through  the  tall  grass  in  the  bottom, 
and  crossed  the  creek  on  a  rude  little  bridge,  which  had 
evidently  been  made  to  enable  the  miners  to  drag  in 
their  lumber  from  the  woods  near  by. 

"  'Pears  like  as  if  these  fellows  hadn't  been  at  work 
here  lately,"  said  Hi,  curiously  scanning  the  diggings. 
Water  had  settled  in  the  holes  where  the  miners  had 
been  digging.  The  only  tools  to  be  seen  were  worthless 
and  rust-covered,  and  a  broken  sluice-box  lay  warping 
In  the  sun.  It  looked  as  if  the  place  had  been  left  for 
a  night,  and  the  workers  had  never  waked  again  to 
their  labors. 

The  boys  climbed  the  divide  and  entered  the  set- 
tlement.     It  was  divided  by  a  single  street  or  alley. 


320  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

which  ran  through  the  middle.  There  were  eight  cab- 
ins on  one  side,  and  seven  on  the  other.  These  were 
built  of  rough  logs,  hewn  boards  or  puncheons,  and  one 
or  two  were  pieced  out  with  blue  cloth,  now  faded  and 
mildewed.  Looking  down  the  street,  the  lads  saw 
that  every  door  was  open,  and  that  most  of  these, 
swinging  outward,  had  an  unhinged  and  neglected 
look.  Here  and  there,  in  the  middle  of  the  narrow 
street,  was  a  scrap  of  cast-off  clothing,  an  old  hat,  a 
broken  tool,  or  a  battered  bit  of  tin-ware;  and,  thickly 
strewing  the  ground,  were  dozens  of  empty  tins,  in 
which  meat,  vegetables,  or  oysters  had  been  pre- 
served. 

But  nobody  was  in  sight.  Arty  timidly  peeped  into 
the  first  cabin  on  the  left.  Nobody  there.  Tom  blun-. 
dered  into  the  house  on  the  right.  Nobody  there.  So 
they  went,  almost  holding  their  breath,  half-suspect- 
ing a  surprise,  down  through  the  little  village.  Every 
house  was  empty,  silent  and  tenantless.  All  save  one. 
In  the  last  house  on  the  left,  where  somebody  had 
planted  wild  columbines  about  the  door-step,  and  a 
few  pink  flowers  were  unfolding  themselves,  as  if  the 
old  solitude  of  the  place  had  returned,  little  Johnny 
started  back  in  affright.  In  the  gloom  of  the  interior 
a  pair  of  huge  fiery  eyes  gleamed  from  one  corner. 

"Wha-what's  that?"  he  stammered,  and  backed 
toward   the    door.      Arty    came    and   looked   over  his 


WANDERING  ONCE  MORE  321 

shoulder,  and  when  the  eyes  of  the  boys  had  become 
a  Httle  accustomed  to  the  darkness,  they  descried  a 
sohtary  cat  sitting  on  a  table  strewed  with  bones, 
broken  pipes,  and  bottles,  the  only  surviving  inhabi- 
tant of  this  deserted  village. 

"Poor  puss  !"  said  Arty,  advancing  toward  her.  Puss 
set  up  her  tail,  cried  "Phit!  Phit!"  darted  through 
the  door,  and  disappeared  in  the  under-brush,  pursued 
by  Pete,  who  was  apparently  delighted  at  seeing  an 
old  acquaintance.  It  was  the  first  cat  he  had  met  in 
California. 

The  boys  stood  still  with  a  sort  of  awe,  which  even 
the  comical  flight  of  the  cat  could  not  quite  dispel. 
They  were  in  a  deserted  camp.  A  village  of  the  dead. 
Where  were  its  inhabitants  ?  Had  a  plague  carried 
them  off.^  If  so,  who  had  buried  the  last  man  ?  The 
untenanted  settlement  bore  no  sign  to  show  who  had 
lived  here  or  where  they  had  gone.  Some  unmeaning 
letters,  hacked  in  the  doorways,  in  moments  of  idle- 
ness, probably  gave  the  initials  of  some  of  the  vanished 
settlers;  and  a  few  rabbit-skins  shrivelling  on  the  cabin- 
walls,  where  they  had  been  nailed  by  the  hunters,  re- 
minded the  visitors  that  destructive  men  had  lived 
here.  But  that  was  all.  The  red  sunlight  sifted  down 
in  an  empty  street,  and  partly  glorified  the  silent, 
shabby,  and  forlorn  mining  camp. 

"These   chaps    have   heard    of  some    rich    diggings 


322  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

somewhere.  They  have  been  easily  discouraged  here. 
And  they  have  packed  up  their  traps  in  a  hurry  and 
vamosed  the  ranch."  This  was  Barney's  dehberate 
opinion,  after  he  had  surveyed  the  ground  with  some 
care. 

This  was  the  most  reasonable  explanation  possible. 
Mont  said  that  if  the  entire  community  of  Swell-Head 
Diggings  had  vanished  in  a  single  day,  bound  for  Gold 
Lake,  as  the  boys  knew,  why  should  not  a  bigger  set- 
tlement leave  in  a  hurry,  and  make  a  rush  for  some 
other  such  folly  ? 

"Anyhow,  here's  a  house  a-piece  for  to-night,"  added 
Mont,  "and  a  plenty  left  for  storage.  We  may  as  well 
camp  here." 

The  young  adventurers  examined  the  habitations 
with  a  critical  air,  but  finally  agreed  to  keep  together 
in  one  of  the  largest  of  the  cabins.  Arty  declared  that 
It  was  "too  poky"  to  sleep  alone  in  any  one  of  these 
deserted  mansions.  Somehow  the  others  were  of  the 
same  opinion. 

Next  morning,  when  they  straggled  out  into  the 
early  daylight,  in  answer  to  Mont's  cheerful  call,  Bar- 
ney crossly  said: 

"I  thought  you  said  this  was  a  deserted  village, 
Mont?" 

"So  I  did." 

"  'Tisn't  so;  there's  plenty  of  tenants." 


WANDERING  ONCE  MORE  323 

"I  know  what  he  means,"  said  Arty,  with  a  comical 
look. 

''What  then?"  demanded  Mont. 

"Fleas!" 

Everybody  laughed.  They  had  been  long  enough  in 
California  to  find  out  that  these  were  tenants  which 
never  caught  the  gold  fever,  and  never  vacated  any 
premises  whatever. 

That  day  brought  them,  after  frequent  stoppages 
for  prospecting,  to  the  base  of  Table  Mountain. 

It  was  a  long  flat-topped  eminence,  almost  perpen- 
dicular as  to  its  sides,  and  shelving  rapidly  down  into 
a  well-wooded  and  broken  country,  cut  up  by  small 
streams.  All  along  these  streams  were  good  diggings, 
it  was  said,  and  the  chances  were  promising  for  gold- 
mining  almost  anywhere. 

In  a  broad,  open  space,  through  which  a  shallow 
creek  poured  over  bars  of  sand  and  gravel,  was  Hoosier- 
town.  Miners'  cabins,  tents  and  booths  were  dotted 
over  the  rocky  interval,  and  all  along  the  creek  were 
men  working  like  beavers.  There  were  sluices,  long- 
toms,  cradles,  and  all  sorts  of  contrivances  for  mining. 
At  one  place  on  the  stream,  the  miners  had  run  a  dam 
out  into  the  current  from  one  bank,  and  then,  curving 
it  down  stream,  had  turned  it  back  again  to  a  point  a 
little  below  the  side  from  which  it  had  started.  This 
was  a  "wingdam."     By  making  it  tolerably  tight  the 


324  THE   BOY   EMIGRANTS 

place  thus  inclosed  was  comparatively  free  of  water. 
Rude  pumps  were  also  put  in  to  pump  out  the  water, 
and  these  were  worked  by  means  of  "flutter-wheels," 
moved  by  the  flowing  water  outside  of  the  dam,  very 
like  the  wheel  of  a  water-mill.  In  this  wingdam  men 
worked  with  the  water  up  to  their  middle.  They  dug 
up  the  bottom  of  the  stream — sand,  gravel,  and  stone. 
As  the  water  sunk  away  and  the  bottom  was  cleaned, 
they  found  gold — gold  in  lumps  and  fine  scales — which 
had  been  washed  there  in  the  far-ofF  times. 

This  was  going  on  all  along  the  stream,  and  every- 
where men  were  busy  with  various  wooden  machines, 
rude  and  clumsy,  to  be  sure,  but  good  enough  for  the 
present  purpose. 

The  boys  looked  on  with  silent  amazement.  This 
was  a  real  mining  settlement.  Here  were  more  than 
one  hundred  men  at  work,  and  using  machinery  that 
had  cost  much  labor  and  money.  They  seemed  to  be 
determined  to  get  every  scrap  of  gold,  even  though 
they  had  to  wipe  up  the  river,  scrape  down  the  moun- 
tain, and  root  out  the  forest.  They  were  very  much  in 
earnest,  anxious,  without  comfort,  and  for  the  most 
part  haggard  and  ragged. 

The  borders  of  the  once  pleasant  stream  were  gashed 
with  diggings,  and  disfigured  with  cumbrous  mining 
apparatus.  Even  upon  the  hill-sides  the  surface  was 
dotted   with    heaps   of   red    and    yellow   earth,   where 


WANDERING  ONCE   MORE  325 

greedy  prospectors  had  burrowed  in  for  gold.  Along 
the  valley,  on  either  side  of  the  stream,  the  cabins,  with 
gaping  seams  open  to  storm  or  wind,  weltered  in  the 
sun;  and  the  barren  and  comfortless  place  wore  a 
homesick  look  to  the  young  gold-hunters. 

Arty's  quick  eye  detected  a  woman's  frock  hanging 
on  the  thorny  branches  of  a  manzanita  brush  near  a 
cabin  which  looked  less  untidy  than  the  others. 

"Hooray!  there's  a  woman  in  this  camp,  anyhow," 
said  Hi,  with  enthusiasm,  when  Arty  had  pointed  out 
the  purple  calico  on  the  manzanita.  "Let's  go  and 
take  a  look  at  her." 

Rather  shamefacedly,  as  if  afraid  of  womankind, 
the  lads  straggled  up  to  the  cabin  and  dropped  their 
packs  on  the  ground.  A  comely  young  woman,  brown 
in  face  and  bare  arms,  but  wearing  a  smart  ribbon  in 
her  hair,  came  to  the  door  with  a  sharp:  "Are  you 
here  again  ?" 

"Nance,  with  hoops  on  as  sure  as  I'm  alive!"  ex- 
claimed Hi;  and  his  under  jaw  dropped  clean  down  to 
express  his  utter  amazement. 

Nance  blushed  to  the  roots  of  her  hair,  and  said: 
"Why,  I  thought  it  was  that  ornery  feller,  Missouri 
Joe;  he's  a  sparkin'  round  here  just  continual." 

"Howdy?  boys,  howdy?"  broke  in  the  good  Mrs. 
Dobbs,  who  now  came  forward  and  looked  over  her 
daughter's  shoulder:  "We're  powerful  glad  to  see  ye. 


326  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

'Pears  like  old  time  to  see  you,  boys.  My  old  man 
was  a-speaking  about  you  no  more'n  yesterday." 

Nance,  recovering  herself  after  her  first  surprise, 
welcomed  the  lads,  and  the  whole  party,  seated  on  the 
door-step  and  about  the  cabin,  exchanged  all  the  news 
they  had  to  tell.  The  Dobbs  family  had  been  here 
since  the  snow  left,  which  was  early,  for  not  much 
snow  fell  in  these  parts.  They  had  done  well.  They 
were  doing  well.  Philo  Dobbs  had  a  "pardner,"  and 
the  two  had  a  wingdam,  from  which  great  things  were 
expected.  Yes,  there  were  plenty  of  chances  here. 
Why,  even  tunnelling  had  been  tried,  and  from  some 
of  these  holes  men  had  got  out  gold,  as  Mrs.  Dobbs 
expressed  it,  "hand  over  fist." 

"Yes,"  she  said,  when  Mont  had  remarked  Nance's 
rapid  growth.  "Yes,  Nance  has  got  to  be  right  peart 
of  a  gal.  If  she  had  a  little  more  age  onto  her,  and 
didn't  kick  up  her  heels  now  and  then,  she'd  be  quite 
a  young  woman." 

"La,  ma,  how  you  do  run  on!"  pouted  Nancy,  the 
blushes  glowing  through  her  brown  cheeks. 

"You  see,  we've  put  her  into  long  gowns.  Clothes 
is  powerful  dear  in  these  parts,  to  be  sure;  but  she's 
the  only  young  lady  in  Hoosiertown,  and  I  tell  my  old 
man,  says  I,  something  must  be  sacrificed  to  appear- 
ances, says  I." 

What  with  a  hoop  skirt,  a  long  calico  dress,  shoes  on 


WANDERING  ONCE   MORE  327 

her  feet,  and  a  ribbon  In  her  hair,  Nance  was  really 
quite  a  changed  person.  Arty  and  Tom  regarded 
her  with  an  unwonted  respect,  and  Hi  blushed  every 
time  he  looked  at  her. 

The  boys  set  up  their  camp  in  a  deserted  cabin 
which  Philo  Dobbs  had  once  occupied,  and  which  he 
gave  them  full  use  of  for  the  present.  At  last !  they 
were  in  a  considerable  community  again.  They  felt 
almost  as  if  they  had  got  back  into  civilization.  At 
night  the  notes  of  a  violin  and  a  flute  from  one  of  the 
cabins  showed  that  the  tired  miners  were  solacing 
themselves  with  music,  and  sounds  of  talk  and  laughter 
floated  on  the  evening  air.  After  all,  "it  was  homelike 
to  be  among  folks  again." 

So  said  honest  Hi,  as  the  boys  contentedly  sat  about 
the  door  of  their  new  home.  Then,  clasping  his  hands 
over  his  knees.  Hi  looked  absently  at  Pete,  who  was 
winking  and  blinking  at  him,  and  added:  "And  she's 
the  only  young  lady  In  this  yere  town  1" 


CHAPTER  XXV 

A    SEPARATION    AND   A   CALAMITY 

A  GREAT  variety  of  mining  was  carried  on  in  the 
vicinity  of  Hoosiertown.  As  we  have  seen,  the  stream 
was  lined  with  works  for  extracting  gold  in  several 
different  ways.  And,  back  from  the  valley,  in  the 
low  hills  of  the  region,  were  some  of  the  operations 
known  as  "dry  diggings";  here  the  earth  was  pierced 
to  a  great  depth  by  perpendicular  holes,  or  shafts. 
Sinking  through  the  dirt  which  had  no  gold  in  it,  the 
miner  finally  reached  a  layer  of  earth  far  under  the 
non-paying  mass,  where  coarse  gold  was  found;  then, 
striking  this  "pay-streak"  underneath  the  ground, 
he  dug  it  out  carefully  and  hoisted  it  up  to  the  surface 
where  the  gold  was  washed  out. 

They  burrowed  in  all  directions  as  long  as  the  pay- 
streak  led  them  on;  and  the  holes  thus  made  were  so 
much  like  the  dens  of  coyotes,  or  little  prairie  wolves, 
that  this  sort  of  mining  was  called  "coyoting."  As 
the  "coyoting"  miner  advanced  with  his  burrow,  far 
below  the  surface,  crawling  on  his  hands  and  knees, 
and  laboriously  dragging  his  basket  of  dirt  to  the  shaft, 

where  his  partner  hoisted  it  up,  he  was  nothing  more 

328 


A  SEPARATION  AND  A  CALAMITY    329 

nor  less  than  a  burrower.  "Dirty  work  brings  clean 
money,"  he  thought;  or  his  mind  went  back  to  wife, 
mother,  children,  and  friends  at  home,  as  he  dug  in 
the  gloom  and  silence  far  underground. 

The  earth  thus  undermined  was  propped  up,  as  the 
"coyoters"  burrowed  in  all  directions,  to  keep  it  from 
caving  in  upon  them.  Usually  the  overhanging  roof 
of  the  burrow  was  so  tough  that  it  needed  no  support. 
But  it  often  happened  that  the  mass  settled  and  quietly 
shut  down  forever  upon  the  workers  below. 

Prospecting  over  the  hills  with  Philo  Dobbs  one  day, 
Hi  and  Mont  came  upon  a  flat  place  where  a  con- 
siderable patch  of  the  ground  had  settled  a  foot  or 
two,  leaving  a  ragged,  brown  edge  to  show  how  far 
the  surface  had  dropped. 

"This  yere,"  said  Dobbs,  stepping  into  the  middle  of 
the  depression,  "is  where  the  Redman  boys  was  caved 
in  on  last  fall.  That  there  hole  is  where  their  shaft 
was. 

"Caved  in  upon.?"  asked  Mont,  with  a  shiver. 
"How  many  of  them  were  there  ?" 

"There  was  the  three  Redman  boys;  they  were 
from  Maine,  they  was;  two  brothers  and  a  cousin. 
Then  there  was  a  chap  from  Illinoy;  name  was  Eph 
Mullet.     They  were  the  chaps  that  was  caved  on." 

"Eph  Mullet!"  exclaimed  Mont.  "Why,  Hi,  that 
was  Bill  Bunce's  partner.     Don't  you  remember.''" 


S 


330  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"Sure  enough,"  said  Philo  Dobbs.  "I  mind  me  now 
that  that  Bunce  had  a  pardner,  but  I  didn't  know  his 
name  was  Mullet.  He  and  Bunce  must  have  fallen 
out,  for  he  was  surely  in  the  Redman  party,  and  is 
buried  under  this  very  spot."  And,  as  if  to  give  em- 
phasis to  his  words,  Dobbs  rose  on  his  toes  and  came 
down  heavily  on  his  heels  in  the  middle  of  this  strange 
grave. 

"And  where  was  the  man  at  the  mouth  of  the  shaft 
all  this  time.?"  asked  Hi,  indignantly.  "Why  didn't 
he  run  down  to  the  camp  at  Hoosiertown,  and  give 
the  alarm,  and  have  these  poor  fellows  dug  out  .f"' 

"Oh,  he  got  off  safe.  But  as  for  Hoosiertown,  that 
wasn't  built  then.  This  was  last  fall,  and  nothing  had 
been  done  at  Hoosiertown  except  a  little  prospecting 
on  the  creek  by  some  stragglers,  who  had  scratched 
about  a  bit  and  had  lit  out  again  for  better  diggin's. 
Here,  you  can  see,  where  the  survivin'  pardner,  as  it 
were,  started  in  to  dig  for  his  mates.  But,  Lor !  he 
had  to  go  down  twenty  odd  feet.  No  wonder  he  gave 
it  up  as  a  bad  job,  and  put  out  by  himself." 

"What  a  horrible  story!"  said  Mont,  looking  at  the 
sunken  tract  of  earth  which  covered  so  much  sorrow. 

"Yas,  yas,"  replied  Dobbs.  "There's  any  number  of 
poor  fellers  huntin'  for  gold  and  leavin'  their  bones 
among  these  yere  hills,  in  pits,  ravines,  and  gulches, 
and  their  folks  at  home  a-wonderin'  why  they  don't 


A  SEPARATION  AND  A  CALAMITY    331 

never  turn  up.  Turn  up  !  Why,  they'll  never  show  a 
hand  till  the  Day  of  Jedgment."  And  Philo  Dobbs 
thoughtfully  picked  up  a  bit  of  pay-dirt,  and  rubbed 
it  out  on  the  palm  of  his  hand. 

Coyote  mining  had  a  gloomy  outlook  to  the  boys,  but 
Hi  was  very  much  fascinated  with  the  hill-diggings 
which  he  saw  some  of  the  miners  at  work  in.  Some  of 
these  were  nothing  more  than  coyote  holes  run  hori- 
zontally with  the  side  of  a  hill,  until  the  pay-dirt  was 
reached.  As  these  rude  tunnels  were  easily  dug,  and 
the  gold  so  found  was  coarse,  the  temptation  to  carry 
on  that  sort  of  mining  was  great.  Hi  declared  in  favor 
of  hill-diggings. 

But  Mont  and  Barnard  had  found  a  place  nearer  the 
camp,  which  promised  better.  Besides,  it  was  the 
only  kind  of  mining  that  they  knew  anything  about, 
and  they  were  afraid  of  any  new  experiments.  Hi 
was  obstinate,  and,  moreover,  he  was  tired,  he  said,  of 
the  old  way,  which  had  not  been  profitable  enough. 
He  wanted  to  get  his  money — lots  of  it — and  leave. 
Miners  were  already  going  back  to  the  States  with 
their  "piles."  Poor  Hi  thought  he  must  make  his 
**pile"  right  away,  and  leave  for  home. 

Mont  and  Barnard  shook  their  heads  sorrowfully. 
Mont  kindly  argued  the  matter  with  their  obstinate 
comrade.  But  Barney  indignantly  blurted  out:  "Why, 
you  wouldn't  burst  up  the  partnership,  would  you?" 


332  THE   BOY   EMIGRANTS 

"Yes,"  said  Hi,  doggedly.  "I'll  go  into  the  hill- 
diggin's  myself,  if  you  don't.    That  is,  Tom  and  I." 

"Tom  and  I,  indeed,"  broke  in  that  young  person. 
"I'd  like  to  know  what  makes  you  think  I'd  go  along 
with  you.  I'm  goin'  to  stay  with  the  rest  of  the 
crowd.     If  you  want  to  git,  git !" 

"See  yere,  youngster,"  said  Hiram,  red  with  anger, 
"you  are  to  go  where  I  go.  I'm  yer  gardeen;  if  you 
don't  go  with  me,  where's  yer  pardner  ?  Who'll  ye 
work  with  ?    The  chances  are  all  taken." 

"I  allow  I'll  work  for  myself,"  said  the  boy,  sullenly, 
but  somewhat  in  doubt. 

"We're  very  sorry  to  have  you  think  of  going,"  said 
Mont,  "but  if  you  must  go,  Tom  may  as  well  go  with 
you.     Isn't  that  so,  boys?" 

The  rest  of  the  party  took  this  view  of  the  case,  and 
after  much  consultation,  it  was  agreed  that  Hi  should 
draw  out  of  the  partnership,  take  his  and  Tom's  share 
of  the  profits,  and  strike  out  for  himself.  The  boys 
were  all  sorry  over  this  first  break  in  their  com- 
pany. 

They  sat  uneasily  about  their  cabin,  in  an  em- 
barrassed way,  as  if  there  was  to  be  a  ceremony  of 
some  sort  which  they  dreaded  to  meet. 

"Hang  it  all !"  said  Hi,  with  a  shamefaced  look.  "I 
allow  it  is  powerful  mean  for  me  to  quit  and  go  off  by 
myself.     D'ye  'spose  it'll  pay,  after  all?" 


A  SEPARATION  AND  A  CALAMITY    333 

"You're  the  best  judge  of  that,"  said  Barney, 
coldly.     "It's  your  own  proposition." 

"No,  no,"  broke  in  Arty,  eagerly,  and  leaning  over 
the  table  toward  Hi.  "Share  and  share  alike  is  always 
better  than  going  it  alone,  you  know.  It's  more  so- 
ciable, anyhow." 

Hi's  eye  softened  a  little  as  he  looked  in  the  bright 
face  of  the  lad;  but  just  then  his  hand  struck  the  heavy 
canvas  pouch  in  which  his  and  Tom's  portion  of  the 
company's  savings  had  been  put.  He  drew  a  long,  hard 
breath,  and  said:  "I  allow  I'll  try  the  hill-diggin's." 

At  Arty's  suggestion,  Hi  and  Tom  decided  to  mess 
with  the  boys  for  the  present.  The  spot  which  Hi  had 
fixed  upon  for  his  trial  at  tunnelling  was  not  so  far 
from  the  cabin  that  he  could  not  come  back  at  night, 
get  his  supper,  and  sleep. 

Hi  was  secretly  glad  to  make  this  arrangement.  He 
would  be  wiUing  to  endure  some  additional  fatigue 
rather  than  lodge  elsewhere  than  with  his  old  com- 
rades. Besides,  as  he  craftily  argued  with  himself,  it 
would  be  more  economical. 

Hi  took  possession  of  a  hole,  or  tunnel,  which  some- 
body had  begun  to  drive  into  a  hill  just  above  Table 
Mountain,  to  the" north.  Near  this  were  two  or  three 
good  claims  in  which  men  were  busily  at  work  and 
taking  out  gold.  Hi's  tunnel  had  been  begun  by  two  or 
three  men  from  Poverty  Hill,  the  deserted  village  on 


334  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

the  divide.  When  the  rush  from  Poverty  Hill  to 
Rattlesnake  Bar  was  made  early  in  the  spring,  said  a 
friendly  Hoosiertown  settler,  these  miners  had  tried 
their  luck  at  river  mining  on  Hoosier  Creek.  A  week's 
work  disgusted  them,  when  they  essayed  hill-diggings, 
put  in  a  few  feet  of  tunnelling,  and  then  were  off  to 
Trinity  River — away  up  in  the  northern  part  of  the 
State. 

Hi  now  entered  into  their  labors,  accompanied  with 
much  grumbling  by  Tom.  As  for  Barnard,  Mont, 
Arthur,  and  Johnny,  after  prospecting  about  the  flat 
near  Hoosiertown,  they  took  up  and  worked  in  a  claim, 
not  much  unlike  that  which  they  had  held  at  Crow- 
bait.  They  met  with  fair  success  at  once,  and,  within 
a  week,  they  "cleaned  up"  eight  hundred  dollars. 
This  was  encouraging.  Hi,  whose  first  question,  when 
weary  and  fagged,  he  reached  the  cabin  at  night  was 
always,  "What  luck  to-day,  boys?"  heard  the  good 
news  with  ill-concealed  chagrin,  though  he  tried  hard  to 
rejoice  heartily  in  the  good  fortune  of  his  late  comrades. 

Nevertheless,  Hi  soon  struck  the  pay-streak  and 
began  to  bring  home  every  night  a  goodly  harvest 
from  his  day's  work.  Three  ounces,  four  ounces,  five 
ounces,  and  even  ten  ounces,  did  he  turn  out  of  his 
buckskin  bag  at  the  end  of  some  day  of  labor.  He 
spread  the  golden  grains  on  the  surface  of  their  rude 
table,  caressing  the  heap  with  real  joy.     Sixteen  dol^ 


A  SEPARATION  AND  A  CALAMITY    335 

lars  to  the  ounce  was  the  rate  of  reckoning  gold  in 
those  days,  and  at  this  rate,  Hi  had  done  well,  for  he 
had  only  just  begun  to  work  into  the  pay-dirt.  He 
was  very  much  elated  by  his  good  luck,  and  if  every- 
body else  had  not  been  too  busy  with  his  own  concerns 
to  bother  about  those  of  others,  he  would  have  had  the 
reputation  of  being  a  highly  successful  miner.  As  it 
was,  his  great  wealth  was  chiefly  in  the  future. 

The  whole  company,  meanwhile,  got  on  very  har- 
moniously in  their  cabin.  They  all  went  to  work  in 
the  morning,  taking  their  dinner  with  them.  At  night 
they  met  around  their  supper,  talked  over  the  events 
of  the  day,  and  speculated  on  the  possibilities  of  to- 
morrow. It  was  a  simple  sort  of  life.  They  enjoyed 
it,  and  Nance,  commonly  known  in  the  camp  as 
"Dobbs's  gal,"  was  kind  enough  to  receive  a  call 
from  them  once  in  a  while,  or  drop  in  and  give  Arthur 
and  Johnny  a  needless  hint  about  cooking  bacon  and 
bread,  which  articles  yet  remained  the  staple  of  their 
fare. 

Hi  regarded  Nance  with  bashful  aversion.  She 
made  him  blush  in  spite  of  himself;  and  once,  when  she 
reproved  him  for  using  slang,  he  grew  very  angry,  and 
said  she  was  "putting  on  airs."  It  must  be  confessed 
that  the  girl  grew  womanly,  sedate,  and  almost  dig- 
nified. She  never  seemed  to  forget  that  she  was  "the 
only  young  lady  in  the  camp." 


336  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"Cut  for  home,  boys,"  said  Barney,  cheerily,  one 
afternoon.  "The  sun  is  down  behind  the  lone  pine, 
and  it's  time  you  were  getting  supper  ready." 

Arty  and  Johnny  very  gladly  dropped  their  tools 
and  climbed  the  hill  which  lay  between  the  claim  and 
Hoosiertown.  The  sun  was  sinking  low,  and  as  the 
lads  passed  over  the  brow  of  the  hill  and  began  to 
descend  the  slope  on  the  other  side,  they  could  see  the 
broken,  perpendicular  walls  of  Table  Mountain  gilded 
with  yellow  Hght. 

The  nearest  edge  of  the  mountain  was  low  in  places, 
with  benches  or  ledges,  running  along  just  above  the 
road  which  wound  through  the  valley  at  the  foot  of 
the  mountain.  As  the  hurrying  boys  paused  for  an 
instant  and  looked  off  over  the  landscape,  bathed  in 
the  setting  sun,  Arty  saw  the  figure  of  a  man  stooping 
and  running  along  the  precipitous  edge  of  the  distant 
cliff,  and  occasionally  stopping  as  if  to  watch  something 
moving  along  the  road  beneath,  which  was  not  in 
sight  from  where  the  boy  stood  on  the  distant  hill. 
Like  a  bird  of  prey,  the  man  swiftly  ran  and  watched, 
then  stooped  and  ran,  and  watched  again.  Now 
and  then  he  made  a  motion  as  if  to  drop  something 
from  his  hand  into  the  road  beneath  his  feet.  Then 
he  seemed  to  think  better  of  it,  and  he  ran  on,  watching 
and  waiting. 
"Curious  critter  that,"  muttered  Arty. 


V 


LIKE  A   BIRD  OF  PREY,    THE   MAN   SWIFTLY   RAN   AND  WATCHED 


f         A  SEPARATION  AND  A  CALAMITY    337 

"Pshaw  !  it  looks  like  Bill  Bunce,"  answered  Johnny, 
with  a  Httle  start  of  disgust.  "Let's  run,"  and  with 
that  he  trotted  toward  home  as  fast  as  his  tired  legs 
could  carry  him. 

Just  then  the  strange  figure  across  the  valley,  now 
near  the  angle  which  Table  Mountain  makes  where 
the  valley  opens  out  toward  Hoosiertown,  let  fall 
something  which  seemed  to  be  a  heavy  stone.  Then 
he  quickly  pitched  down  another  and  another.  Then 
he  jumped  over  the  edge  of  the  cliff  and  scrambled 
down  out  of  sight  toward  the  road  below. 

"Queer  boy  Johnny  is;  always  thinking  of  Bill 
Bunce!"  so  said  Arty  to  himself,  as  he  bounded  along 
light-heartedly  and  overtook  his  comrade. 

When  they  reached  the  cabin,  Tom  was  there  before 
them,  and  was  already  chopping  the  fire-wood  for 
their  evening  cooking,  and  grumbling  about  his  brother. 

"Yes,"  he  said,  "Hi's  always  higgling  and  haggling. 
He's  afraid  to  leave  the  leastest  speck  of  gold  anywhere 
about  that  confounded  old  tunnel  over  night.  There's 
no  thieves  about.  Honest  country,  I  say.  But  Hi,  he's 
dreffle  suspicious.     Sly  folks  always  is." 

Arty  remonstrated  with  Tom  for  holding  such  a  mean 
opinion  of  his  brother,  and  Barney  and  Mont,  who 
soon  came  over  the  hill,  rebuked  the  lad  for  not  staying 
with  Hi  to  help  him  clear  up  his  day's  work. 

"Hi    is    a    good    brother,    anyhow,"    said    Barnard 


338  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

heartily,  as  he  blew  the  water  off  his  red  face,  and 
began  to  polish  it  with  a  coarse  towel.  "And,  my  lit- 
tle man,  it  stands  you  in  hand  to  hold  up  your  end  of 
the  yoke,  as  Arty  says.     Still,  Hi  is  late  to-night." 

Just  then  four  or  five  red-shirted  miners,  bearing 
some  strange  burden,  came  out  from  the  mouth  of 
the  valley  above  and  made  straight  for  the  cabin  where 
our  boys  were  making  ready  for  supper. 

They  seemed  to  be  carrying  a  wounded  man;  and 
as  they  drew  nearer,  the  tender-hearted  Barney  burst 
out  with,  "My  grief!  it's  poor  old  Hi!"  And  so  it 
was.  The  miners,  coming  home  from  work,  had  en- 
countered a  figure  sitting  up  in  the  dust  and  feebly 
trying  to  rise.  There  was  a  ghastly  wound  on  the 
top  of  his  head.  His  hair  was  clotted,  and  dark  red 
stains  were  on  his  face.  Groping  about  in  the  dazzling 
light  of  the  sun,  then  level  with  the  valley.  Hi,  for  the 
miners  recognized  Hi  Fender,  had  murmured  some- 
thing indistinctly,  and  had  become  unconscious. 

The  poor  fellow  was  laid  upon  his  bunk.  Mont  said 
at  once,  "We  must  have  a  doctor." 

"Thar's  nary  doctor  round  hyar,"  said  one  of  the 
miners,  roughly  but  kindly.  "Yer  pard's  hurt  power- 
ful bad.     He  may  as  well  pass  in  his  checks." 

"Perhaps  doctorin'  will  do  him  no  good.  But 
there's  a  young  chap  down  to  Smith's  Bar  who  does 
something  in  that  line." 


A  SEPARATION  AND  A  CALAMITY    339 

It  seemed  an  age  to  the  sorrowful,  anxious  group  in 
the  cabin  while  Barney,  mounted  on  the  only  steed 
in  the  camp,  a  fiery  mustang,  rode  to  Smith's  Bar, 
four  miles  away,  and  brought  back  the  doctor. 

Meanwhile,  Mont  and  Arthur  bathed  poor  Hi's 
head,  cleansed  his  face,  and  tried  to  reHeve  his  suffer- 
ings. He  only  groaned  and  made  no  sign  of  intelli- 
gence. 

Tom,  heavy-hearted  and  remorseful,  went  on  with 
the  cooking  of  supper  in  an  absent-minded  way.  The 
men  who  had  brought  Hi  home  said:  "Just  send  word 
over  to  yon  blue  tent,  if  there's  anything  we  can  do 
for  you — whisky,  camphire,  watchers,  or  anything  the 
like  of  that."    Then  they  went  their  way. 


CHAPTER  XXVI 

A   STRANGE    CASE 

Mont  scrutinized  with  some  sharpness  and  anxiety 
the  doctor  from  Smith's  Bar.  He  was  a  tall,  lithe, 
sinewy  young  fellow,  with  a  long,  full  beard,  like  a 
tangle  of  flax,  a  worn  face,  and  cold,  gray  eyes.  He 
wore  a  slouch  hat  and  a  blue  flannel  shirt;  his  trousers 
were  tucked  into  his  boots,  and  a  belt  at  his  waist 
carried  a  Httle  wallet,  where  less  peaceable  people 
usually  wore  a  pistol. 

Arty  was  immediately  disgusted  with  the  cold,  hard 
way  with  which  the  young  doctor  asked  a  few  ques- 
tions about  the  accident,  and  with  the  business-like 
and  unsympathetic  manner  with  which  he  studied 
the  wounds  of  the  unconscious  Hi,  who  still  lay  breath- 
ing heavily  and  unable  to  speak. 

"A   queer-looking   doctor,   I   must   say,"   muttered 

Mont  to  himself,  very  much  dissatisfied  with  his  general 

appearance.      And    his    thoughts    went    back    to    the 

white-haired,  dignified  physician  of  his  New  England 

home,  a  man  whose  presence  seemed  to  shed  a  balm  of 

healing  wherever  he  went.      But  when  Doctor  Carson 

340 


A  STRANGE  CASE  341 

tenderly  lifted  Hi's  wounded  head,  dressed  the  poor 
mangled  scalp  with  light  swiftness,  and  cleansed,  with 
all  of  a  woman's  skilfulness  of  touch,  the  places  that 
the  boys  had  not  dared  to  touch,  Mont  changed  his 
mind,  and  Barney  and  Arty  looked  on  with  grateful 
admiration. 

**I  will  stay  with  you  until  he  recovers  conscious- 
ness," said  the  doctor.     "He  will  rally  presently." 

It  was  now  late  into  the  night,  but  nobody  cared  to 
sleep  until  they  knew  whether  life  or  death  was  before 
their  comrade.  Doctor  Carson  had  spoken  cheerily,  but 
he  had  given  no  opinion;  none  had  been  asked,  and 
the  boys  dropped  wearily  about,  while  the  doctor,  with 
his  chin  resting  on  his  hand,  sat  steadfastly  and  thought- 
fully regarding  Hi. 

Presently  the  young  fellow  stirred  out  of  his  long 
trance,  and,  moving  his  hand,  heavily  whispered: 
"The  other  pocket!   the  other  pocket!" 

The  doctor  started  forward  to  catch  the  words,  when 
Hi,  calmly  opening  his  eyes,  looked  up  at  him  with 
surprise  and  said:  "Well,  what  of  it?" 

Doctor  Carson  smiled  and  said,  pleasantly:  "So  it 
was  the  other  pocket,  was  it?" 

Hi  looked  at  him  with  a  queer,  puzzled  air,  and 
feebly  replied:  "I  don't  know  about  that.  Was  I 
hurt  much  ?" 

"Not  much  to  speak  of,  my  man.     But  I  wouldn't 


342  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

talk  about  it  now.  In  the  morning  you  can  tell  us 
all  about  it." 

But  Hi  persisted.  "I  always  allowed  that  there 
tunnel  would  cave.  I  meant  to  have  timbered  it  to- 
morrow or  next  day."  And  here  Hi  painfully  raised 
his  hand  to  his  head,  shuddered,  and,  as  if  shocked  at 
the  discovery  of  his  wounds,  relapsed  into  uncon- 
sciousness again. 

The  gray  dawn  was  struggling  into  the  cabin,  when 
Arty,  sick  and  faint  with  waiting  and  watching,  awoke 
from  an  uneasy  sleep  on  the  floor.  The  young  doctor 
still  sat,  alert  and  vigilant,  by  the  side  of  Hi's  bunk; 
Mont  was  near  at  hand  with  all  his  usual  freshness 
and  helpfulness.  Barney  slept  with  his  head  leaning 
forward  on  the  table,  while  Tom  and  Johnny  were 
yet  sound  asleep  in  their  own  places. 

Hi  had  asked  for  water  once  or  twice  during  the 
night,  but  beyond  that  he  had  made  no  sign  of  coming 
back  to  life.  So  they  sat  and  watched  and  waited. 
The  bright  morning  rose  up  fresh  and  clear  over  Table 
Mountain,  flooding  the  valley  with  its  redness.  Sounds 
of  early  labor  came  from  the  scattered  cabins  in  the 
flat.  The  creaking  of  the  flutter-wheels  which  had 
kept  on  through  the  night  was  now  confused  with 
other  noises,  as  the  miners  began  another  day's  work. 
Smoke  curled  from  the  rude  chimneys  of  Hoosiertown; 
faint  odors  of  frying  meat  floated  on  the  tranquil  air, 


A  STRANGE  CASE  343 

and  two  or  three  red-shirted  citizens,  groping  their 
way  out  into  the  light,  stretched  themselves  heavily 
and  yawned  with  a  tremendous  yawn,  the  echoes  of 
which  reached  Arty,  where  he  sat  against  the  wall  of 
the  cabin  looking  out,  sad-eyed  and  dejected,  through 
the  open  door. 

Mrs.  Dobbs,  who  had  been  often  by  the  sick  man's 
side  the  night  before,  now  put  her  head  in  at  the  door 
and  whispered:  "How  is  he  by  this  time.''" 

The  doctor  said:  "He's  looking  better." 

Then  Hi  suddenly  awoke  and  said:  "You  allow  it's 
a  pretty  bad  hurt,  do  you,  mister.?" 

"Yes,"  said  the  doctor,  "but  you  will  come  out  all 
right;  don't  worry  about  it.  You  are  feeling  pretty 
well  now  ?" 

"Right  peart,  'cept  about  the  head.  My  head  is  as 
light  as  a  feather.  Oh,  yes,  I  remember  it  all  now. 
The  tunnel  caved  in  on  me.  When  I  felt  the  rock 
coming  down  on  me,  and  heard  'em  patterin'  on  my 
head  and  shoulders,  I  made  for  the  mouth  of  the 
tunnel.  I  just  remember  how  the  sun  blazed  into  my 
eyes  when  I  staggered  out  on  the  side-hill.  It  seemed 
as  if  the  world  was  all  afire,  comin'  out  of  that  there 
dark  hole,  and  facing  the  glare  of  the  sun." 

"Well,  well,  I  wouldn't  go  on  no  more  about  it  now, 
Hi,"  said  Mrs.  Dobbs.  "The  doctor  says  you  must 
be  kept  quiet." 


344  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

But,  though  urged  to  keep  still,  Hi  continued:  "I 
allow  I  must  have  put  for  home.  I  saw  the  road.  It 
was  all  red  dust,  and  the  sun  poured  down  over  it. 
But  I  disremember  how  I  got  over  it.  It  appears  like 
I  was  carried." 

"Yes,"  said  Mont,  "the  fellows  over  to  the  blue 
tent  were  coming  up  from  their  claim.  They  saw  you 
sitting  in  the  road,  wounded,  and  they  brought  you 
home." 

"Good  fellows,  those  blue-tent  chaps.  Whereabouts 
was  I  then  .?" 

"Just  at  the  angle  of  the  road,  where  it  breaks  around 
the  mountain." 

"What .?  away  down  there!"  exclaimed  Hi.  "Why, 
I  must  have  staggered  along  right  smart.  Certainly 
I  disremember  anything  that  happened  after  I  got 
out  into  the  sunlight." 

The  doctor  here  put  in  his  emphatic  protest  against 
Hi's  having  any  more  talk.  So  the  wounded  man  lay 
quite  still,  muttering  to  himself:  "Cur'ous!   cur'ous!" 

Although  Hoosiertown  was  a  busy  place,  the  good- 
hearted  miners  found  time  to  call  at  the  cabin  and 
inquire  how  Hi  was  getting  on,  and  to  bring  Httle 
gifts  to  the  invalid. 

In  a  day  or  two  he  grew  weaker  and  more  infirm  in 
his  mind,  and  sometimes  he  seemed  wandering  and 
"luny,"   as  Nance  expressed   it.     The  girl  was   very 


'THEY   SAW  YOU   SITTING   IN   THE   ROAD,    WOUNDED,    AND  THEY   BROUGHT  YOU    HOME 


A  STRANGE  CASE  345 

helpful  to  the  distressed  family,  but  Arty  was  quite 
out  of  patience  with  her  shyness.  She  was  as  bright 
and  impertinent  as  ever  at  times;  but  usually  she 
seemed  so  dignified  and  reserved  that  Arty  quite  agreed 
with  Tom,  who  pronounced  her  "stuck  up." 

Doctor  Carson  came  and  went  every  day,  and  looked 
on  Hi's  frequent  lapses  of  mind  with  some  anxiety.  On 
one  of  these  occasions,  Hi,  as  if  struggling  with  some 
imaginary  foe,  painfully  muttered:  "Don't  strike 
again.     Don't!     Don't!     It's  in  the  other  pocket!" 

"Oh,  sho!"  said  Tom,  "he's  always  saying  that 
when  he  has  those  spells." 

"Always  saying  that.'"'  asked  the  doctor,  sharply. 
He  had  been  watching  Hiram;  but  he  could  make 
nothing  satisfactory  out  of  the  case. 

"Yes,"  replied  Tom,  "two  or  three  times,  when  he 
has  had  these  wandering  spells,  he  talks  like  that.  And 
he  talks  all  sorts  of  ridiculous  things.  Drivin'  cattle, 
and  so  on." 

Doctor  Carson  was  puzzled.  When  Hi  grew  better 
he  asked  him  about  the  accident.  Hi  was  very  clear  in 
his  story.  He  perfectly  remembered  the  caving  in 
of  the  tunnel.  He  felt  the  rocks  fall  on  his  head  and 
shoulders;  but  most  completely  he  recalled  to  mind 
how  the  bright  sunshine  dazzled  his  eyes  when  he  came 
out  to  the  mouth  of  the  tunnel,  and  how  red  the  dusty 
road  under  the  bluff  looked,  as  he  caught  a  glimpse 


346  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

of  it  and  fell.  It  was  a  clear  case  to  him.  "I  allow 
I  know  what  happened,"  he  said,  with  some  impa- 
tience. 

Hiram  murmured  and  fretted  over  this  loss  of  time. 
"It  was  just  his  luck,"  he  said,  "to  be  laid  up  when 
he  was  on  the  edge  of  a  good  streak  of  dirt."  But  he 
consoled  himself  with  the  reflection  that  his  last  day's 
work  was  a  good  one. 

"Must  have  had  ten  or  twelve  ounces,"  he  chuck- 
led.    "By  the  way,  where  is  that  there  bag?" 

Nobody  had  seen  it.  Hi  had  been  in  the  habit  of 
bringing  home  the  result  of  his  day's  work  in  a  buck- 
skin bag,  which  had  been  a  company  afi^air.  Arty 
had  printed  "Bostons"  on  it  with  pen  and  ink;  and  a 
scorched  mark  near  the  mouth  of  it  gave  it  another 
feature.  But  that  particular  bag  was  nowhere  to  be 
found.  Nobody  had  seen  it  since  the  day  when  Hi 
put  it  in  his  pocket,  and  had  gone  to  work  on  that  un- 
fortunate day.  Hi  was  sure  that  he  had  his  gold  in  it 
when  he  left  the  tunnel.  He  had  crammed  it  into  the 
left-hand  pocket  of  his  jacket,  for  he  was  just  ready 
to  leave  the  tunnel  when  the  crash  came.  But  it  was 
not  in  the  garments  which  he  wore  that  day. 

"I  must  have  dropped  it  when  I  staggered  down  the 
hill.  Some  of  you  boys  go  look  for  it,  won't  you  .'* 
You'll  find  it  in  the  grass  along  the  trail,  maybe,  or 
at  the  mouth  of  the  tunnel." 


A  STRANGE  CASE  347 

Tom  and  Johnny  darted  off  to  look.  They  were 
gone  an  hour  or  two,  but  found  no  pouch.  Hi  fretted 
and  worried. 

"Did  you  go  Into  the  tunnel  ?"  he  demanded. 

"Of  course  not,"  repHed  Tom,  sharply.  "We  just 
looked  in  a  little  ways.  You  must  have  dropped  it  on 
the  trail  and  somebody  picked  it  up." 

"Oh,  you  shiftless!"  scolded  Hi.  "I'll  look  myself 
as  soon  as  I  get  out." 

But  the  poor  fellow  did  not  get  out  as  soon  as  he 
expected.  He  recovered  slowly,  and  his  spells  of  men- 
tal wandering  returned  frequently,  to  the  great  distress 
of  his  comrades. 

They  made  no  account  of  his  queer  mutterings.  He 
was  continually  talking  in  a  vague  way,  and  about  all 
sorts  of  things,  when  his  mind  was  thus  unsettled.  He 
seemed  to  be  in  a  kind  of  nightmare  at  such  times. 
He  raved  incessantly  about  gold.  Gold  was  the  burden 
of  his  talk,  and  if  he  was  not  picking  it  up  in  his  dreams 
he  was  defending  his  treasure  against  the  assaults 
of  imaginary  robbers,  with  whom  he  often  pleaded: 
"Don't  strike  me  again !    It's  in  the  other  pocket !" 

Doctor  Carson  questioned  Hi  about  his  accident,  when 
he  was  in  full  possession  of  his  senses.  He  weighed 
his  words  and  vigilantly  watched  him  while  he  was 
awake  or  asleep,  and  when  he  was  wandering  in  his 
mind.     There  was  no  clue  to  his  wild  talk.      But  the 


348  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

doctor  was  sure  that  the  wounds  on  Hi's  head  were 
not  made  by  a  caving  wall. 

One  day,  having  asked  for  the  shortest  way  to  the 
tunnel,  Doctor  Carson  rode  up  to  that  long-neglected 
work.  Dismounting,  he  lighted  a  candle,  which  he 
found  laid  in  a  rift  of  rock,  just  where  Hi  had  left  it, 
and  stepped  carefully  into  the  tunnel.  It  had  been 
run  in  about  twenty  feet.  Groping  along,  he  soon 
reached  the  face  wall  at  the  end  where  Hi's  pick  and 
shovel  lay  as  he  left  them  weeks  ago.  The  roof  was 
as  soUd  and  firm  as  ever.  The  few  rough  props  put 
in  to  support  it  were  all  there.  There  had  been  no 
cave. 

Amazed,  yet  partly  relieved,  the  doctor  felt  his  way 
back  to  the  light,  blew  out  his  taper  and  sat  down  to 
think.  There  was  the  flood  of  sunlight,  just  as  Hi 
saw  it;  and  the  red  road,  which  met  his  eye  as  he 
staggered  out,  still  wound  down  to  the  camp. 

When  Doctor  Carson  returned  and  gravely  said: 
"There  was  no  cave  in  the  tunnel,"  everybody  echoed: 
"No  cave.?" 

Hi  said:  "I'll  have  to  take  your  word  for  it,  doctor. 
But  I'll  give  you  my  word  that  that  there  tunnel  did 
cave  and  bust  my  crust,  so  now!" 


CHAPTER  XXVII 

NEWS    AND   DISCOVERIES 

"Letters!  letters!"  shouted  Arthur,  with  great 
glee,  one  night,  as  the  tired  miners  came  up  to  their 
cabin  from  the  claim.  They  had  had  good  luck  dur- 
ing the  past  few  days;  but  even  the  sight  of  much 
gold,  now  no  longer  strange,  could  not  wholly  relieve 
the  feeling  of  weariness  which  comes  from  long  and 
exacting  labor.  The  glimpse  of  a  bundle  of  letters 
from  home,  which  Arty  shook  in  their  faces  as  they 
approached  the  cabin,  banished  all  fatigue.  Nothing 
was  so  precious  as  these  much-worn  packets  of  news 
and  loving  messages  from  friends  far  away.  They 
had  been  handled  a  great  deal  since  they  arrived  in 
San  Francisco.  Bearing  the  marks  of  travel,  as  well 
as  the  queer  red  and  blue  stamps  of  the  express  com- 
panies, these  letters  had  hunted  for  the  young  emi- 
grants all  the  way  from  Sacramento  and  Nye's  Ranch 
through  various  diggings  and  camps.  A  bright-eyed, 
alert-looking  young  fellow,  mounted  on  a  scrubby  but 
speedy  mustang,  had  dashed  into  town,  dropped  a  few 
packages  at  "Freeman  &  Co.'s  agency,"  bandied  com- 
pliments with  the  loungers  about  the  place,  mounted 

349 


350  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

his  steed  again,  and  had  loped  ofF  in  a  more  leisurely 
way  toward  Sardine  Gulch. 

Dropping  his  preparations  for  supper,  Arty  had 
raced  across  "the  branch"  to  the  store,  where  he  was 
rewarded  with  a  huge  package  of  letters,  for  which  the 
enormous  express  charges  seemed  to  him  a  small 
price.  Letter-carriage  in  those  days  was  costly;  no- 
body knew  what  the  rates  were;  they  varied  every 
week,  but  anywhere  from  a  dollar  to  five  dollars  for  a 
single  letter — the  original  postage  on  which  was  ten 
or  twenty  cents — was  not  thought  an  unreasonable 
charge.  The  boys  murmured  sometimes,  when  they 
had  read  their  infrequent  letters  many  times;  but  no- 
body thought  of  grumbling  until  the  first  excitement 
of  receiving  letters  was  over,  and  the  brisk  young  ex- 
press-rider was  far  away. 

A  pleasant  excitement  reigned  in  the  cabin  of  the 
young  miners  while  news  from  home  was  read  and 
discussed.  The  Sugar  Grove  folks  had  received  their 
California  gold  with  great  pride  and  dehght.  The 
neighbors  had  all  been  in  to  look  at  it  before  it  was 
taken  to  town  and  sold.  Other  Lee  County  people, 
scattered  through  California,  had  sent  home  gold,  but 
the  brothers  of  Barnard  and  Arthur  wrote  that  no 
such  gold  as  this  had  ever  been  seen  before  in  those 
parts.  How  proud  and  thankful  they  were !  The 
mortgage  on  the  farm  was  now  to  be  paid  off;  brother 


NEWS  AND  DISCOVERIES  351 

Sam  was  to  have  the  double-barrelled  shot-gun  (which 
he  had  long  coveted)  before  the  season  for  prairie- 
chickens  came  again.  The  mother  had  bought  a 
new  rocking-chair  for  father;  and  there  was  even  some 
talk  of  having  a  hired  girl  to  help  about  the  house. 

Arty  read  and  re-read  these  simple  details  of  the 
far-away  home-life  with  glistening  eyes,  and  then 
looked  out  on  the  ragged  mining  camp,  the  turbid 
creek,  the  hill-sides  covered  with  furze  and  chaparral, 
and  wondered  if  it  were  possible  that  these  existed  on 
the  same  planet  that  held  his  old  home — the  tidy  Lee 
County  farm. 

Hi,  who  was  now  able  to  get  about  his  work  after  a 
feeble  fashion,  grew  pensive  over  his  letters,  and  began 
to  think  that  home  was,  after  all,  a  better  place  for 
him  than  this,  even  though  he  should  not  carry  a 
fortune  to  it.  Mont  encouraged  this  idea;  and  he, 
too,  looked  up  from  the  finely-written  pages  which 
had  come  all  the  way  from  New  England  to  him,  with 
a  bright  face  and  tenderness  in  his  eyes. 

Most  of  all,  however,  were  the  boys  interested  in  an 
extraordinary  letter  which  Johnny  received  from  a 
lawyer  in  Richardson.  Farmer  Stevens  had  put  into 
this  man's  hands  all  the  facts  about  Johnny's  parent- 
age and  supposed  wrongs,  and  he  had  traced  up  the 
case  as  far  as  possible.  Mr.  Stevens  wrote  to  his 
boys  that  there  was  a  good  prospect  of  recovering  the 


352  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

property  which  Johnny's  faithless  guardian  had  taken 
possession  of,  but  some  legal  documents  were  needed; 
and  the  lawyer  had  written  to  Johnny  to  inform  him 
of  all  that  had  been  done.  This  is  the  lawyer's  letter, 
written  in  a  stiff,  upright  hand: 

Richardson,  Lee  County,  Ills.,  April  9,  18—, 
Master  J.  F.  Bluebaker. 

Respected  Sir:  I  have  to  communicate  to  you  the  following 
facts  concerning  your  case,  which  I  have  undertaken  at  the  instance 
of  Obadiah  L.  Stevens,  Esq.,  a  worthy  citizen  of  Sugar  Grove 
Township,  this  county,  with  whose  sons,  or  other  relatives,  I  un- 
derstand you  are  associated  in  business. 

To  wit:  Ophelia  Bluebaker,  maiden  name  Jenness,  your  mother,  as 
I  now  understand  the  case,  was  left  a  widow  with  one  child,  name, 
John  Francis  Bluebaker,  about  seven  years  ago.  The  widow  re- 
sided near  Oregon,  Ogle  County,  this  State,  where  she  held  legal 
possession  of  landed  property,  stock,  fixtures,  agricultural  imple- 
ments, the  schedule  of  which  now  exists  in  the  Probate  Court 
Records  of  said  Ogle  County,  Oregon  bemg  the  shire  town  thereof. 
In  due  process  of  nature,  Mrs.  Bluebaker  died,  leaving  her  infant 
son  to  the  guardianship  of  her  brother,  one  John  F.  Jenness,  a  vet- 
erinary surgeon,  commonly  called  a  horse-doctor,  of  Lick  Springs, 
Vermilion  County,  this  State. 

The  property  hereinbefore  mentioned  passed  with  the  boy  (who 
was,  I  beg  leave  to  say,  yourselQ  into  the  custody  of  said  Jenness. 
This  person,  being  the  only  surviving  relative  of  Mrs.  Bluebaker, 
your  respected  mother,  except  yourself,  seems  to  have  conceived 
the  idea  of  secreting  or  otherwise  fraudulently  disposing  of  the 
lad — meaning  yourself.  Jenness,  commonly  called  Dr.  Jenness,  as 
nearly  as  I  can  discover,  had  already  managed  to  convert  to  his 
own  use  and  behoof  a  portion  of  the  income  of  the  estate  of  the 
late  Bluebaker;  and,  if  the  facts  which  come  to  me  are  trust- 
worthy, he  employed  one  William  Bunce  and  Ephraim  W.  Mullet 
to   carry   the   boy,   meaning  yourself,   to   California,   and   "lose" 


NEWS  AND  DISCOVERIES  353 

him  on  the  way.  For  this  unlawful  service  said  Bunce  and  Mullet 
were  to  receive  an  outfit  for  California,  and  the  boy  was  to  be  pro- 
vided with  a  sum  of  money  which  would  subsist  him  for  a  time  if 
left  in  a  strange  place;  but  it  may  occur  to  an  unprejudiced  person 
that  the  money  given  to  the  boy,  which  was  in  gold,  might  also 
have  been  intended  to  tempt  the  ruffians  to  dealing  foully  with  him. 
These  facts  are  partly  derived  from  the  admissions  which  the  said 
W.  Bunce  has  made  to  the  Messrs.  Stevens,  Morse,  and  Fender,  in 
California.  But  they  are,  with  additions,  confirmed  by  the  affi- 
davits of  one  Polly  Gardner,  an  inmate  and  housekeeper  in  the  family 
of  the  late  Jenness.  I  say  the  late  Jenness,  because  that  person 
was  killed  by  being  thrown  from  his  wagon,  in  February  last. 
Proceedings  may  be  instituted  to  recover  for  you  the  unexpended 
portion  of  your  estate,  as  soon  as  you  choose  a  legal  guardian  and 
have  forwarded  to  your  attorney  (in  which  capacity  I  should  be 
pleased  to  serve  you)  the  necessary  papers.  I  am  unfamiliar  with 
the  laws  in  your  somewhat  unsettled  country;  but  presume  that  a 
power  of  attorney  given  to  Mr.  Stevens,  from  your  guardian  when 
chosen,  would  enable  him  to  institute  proceedings  to  recover. 
I  have  the  honor,  sir,  to  subscribe  myself, 
Your  ob't  serv't, 

Cyril  H.  Duffer, 

Att'y-at-Law. 

P.  S. — It  may  interest  you  to  know  that  the  estate  hereinbefore 
referred  to  is  variously  estimated  by  experts,  who  are  neighbors, 
at  from  twenty-five  thousand  dollars  to  thirty  thousand  dollars 
value.  C  H.  O. 

"What  a  prosy  old  duffer!"  cried  Tom,  when  the 
reading  was  concluded. 

"Twenty-five  or  thirty  thousand  dollars!"  said  Hi, 
putting  his  hand  painfully  to  his  head.  "That's  a 
power  of  money.  More'n  I  ever  hope  to  take  home 
with  me.     Thirty  thousand !     Well,  that  beats  me." 


354  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"You're  rich  before  us,  Johnny,"  said  Arty,  with 
an  honest  glow  of  satisfaction.  "But,"  he  added  with 
concern,  "  you'll  have  to  leave  us  and  go  home  to  look 
after  your  property." 

"Oh,  no,"  Mont  explained.  "He  need  not  go  until 
he  gets  ready.  We  can  go  down  to  Sacramento,  or 
to  the  new  Mayor  at  Marysville,  and  have  the  papers 
fixed  up  for  him.  By  the  way,  Johnny,  what  are  you 
going  to  do  about  a  guardian  ?" 

"A  guardeen,"  repeated  Johnny,  with  a  troubled 
air.     "Who  will  be  my  guardeen?    Will  you,  Arty  .f"' 

Everybody  laughed,  and  Mont  said: 

"No,  Johnny,  you  must  have  a  guardian  who  is 
twenty-one  years  of  age.     Arty's  too  young,  you  know." 

"Then  I'll  take  Barney,"  said  the  boy  quickly;  and 
appealing  to  Barnard,  he  said:  "Will  you  be  my  guar- 
deen, Barney  ?  I  must  have  one,  and  I  don't  know 
anybody  else,  scarcely,  but  you." 

"Yes,"  cried  Barney  heartily,  "I'll  be  your  guardian. 
But  I  shall  have  to  give  bonds,  I  suppose.  Shall  I, 
Mont?" 

Mont,  thus  appealed  to,  thought  all  that  could  be 
arranged  satisfactorily,  but  he  was  not  sure  about  the 
bonds;  and  Johnny,  with  a  gleam  of  light  in  his  sober 
face,  put  his  hand  in  Barnard's,  and  said: 

"Isn't  it  something  Hke  a  father-in-law,  this  guar- 
deen?" 


NEWS  AND  DISCOVERIES  355 

The  matter  was,  on  the  whole,  easily  arranged.  It 
was  not  necessary  to  go  to  Sacramento  in  order  to 
secure  the  necessary  legal  papers.  An  accommodat- 
ing magistrate  was  found  nearer  home;  and  though  the 
machinery  of  the  law  was  somewhat  rude  in  the  region 
of  Hoosiertown,  it  satisfied  the  needs  of  the  young 
miners,  and  the  papers  were  made  out  and  sent  home. 

"You  can  call  him  'pap,'  I  suppose,  now,"  said 
Tom,  rather  enviously,  when  Barnard  was  declared  to 
be  the  lawful  guardian  of  Master  John  F.  Bluebaker. 

"And  a  young-looking  father  he  is,  too !"  struck  in 
Arty,  who  was  highly  amused  with  this  novel  turn  of 
affairs.  "Call  him  'guardy,'  Johnny;  it's  just  as  good 
as  anything  else." 

"I  never  called  anybody  *pap,'  "  said  the  poor  boy. 
"I  never  knew  anybody  to  call  'father,'  but  I'll  do 
just  what  Barney  says." 

"Never  mind,  my  laddie,"  said  Barnard.  "Call  me 
whatever  you  please.  But  I  don't  want  any  handle  to 
my  name.  'Barney,'  or  even  'Barney  Crogan,'  is 
good  enough  for  me,  although  that  young  scapegrace 
of  a  brother  of  mine  did  put  on  the  Crogan." 

"Now,  don't  put  on  any  airs,  Barney  Crogan," 
joined  in  Nance,  who  took  part  in  all  the  family  coun- 
cils on  the  subject  of  Johnny's  future  prospects. 
"Crogan  you  be,  and  Crogan  you'll  stay,  guardeen  or 
no  guardeen,  you  can  jest  bet  yer — I  mean,  that  is, 


3S6  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

you  may  be  very  sure,"  and  Nance  coughed  violently 
to  hide  her  confusion. 

"Hello!"  cried  Tom,  rudely,  "if  Nance  didn't  come 
nigh  saying  'you  bet  yer  life,'  just  Hke  she  used  to.  Laws 
sakes  alive !  Miss  Nancy  Dobbs,  how  peart  you  have 
growed!"  and  the  boy  minced  along  the  cabin  floor, 
stepping  on  the  tips  of  his  bare  toes  and  drawing  up 
his  shoulders,  as  if  imitating  some  imaginary  fine  lady. 

The  girl  flashed  up  suddenly,  and  before  Tom  knew 
what  was  going  to  happen,  she  gave  him  such  a  cufF 
that  he  tumbled  headlong  into  a  corner,  where  he  fell 
ingloriously  into  a  confused  huddle  of  pots  and  pans. 

"Come,  now!  I  say,  Nance,  jest  you  strike  a  feller 
of  your  size,  can't  you?"  And,  red  with  anger,  Tom 
scrambled  out  of  the  way  and  regarded  Nance  with 
some  defiance  as  well  as  shame. 

The  boys  laughed  at  Tom's  discomfiture,  but  Nance, 
with  some  mortification  in  her  turn,  said: 

"I  beg  pardon,  Tom;  I  didn't  mean  to  cufi^  you. 
But  if  you  give  me  any  of  your  chin — I  mean  if  you 
sass  me  that  way — well,  no  matter  what  I  mean." 
And  Nance  walked  off  without  another  word. 

"There,  now!"  said  Hi,  angrily;  "you've  been  and 
vexed  the  best  gal  in  Hoosiertown,  and  it'll  serve  you 
right  if  she  don't  come  into  this  shebang  ag'in  for  a 
week." 

"Say  the  only  gal  in  Hoosiertown  and  you'll  hit  it," 


NEWS  AND   DISCOVERIES  357 

replied  Tom,  surlily.  "  'Cause  you're  sweet  on  Nance, 
must  she  go  for  to  fetch  me  a  bat  on  the  side  of  the 
cabesa  like  that  ?  Whew !  but  she's  got  a  heavy  hand, 
though!"  And  Tom  rubbed  his  head,  with  a  comical 
air  of  misery. 

"If  you  didn't  know  I  was  weakly,"  said  his  brother, 
with  a  very  red  face,  "you  wouldn't  dare  to  sass  me 
like  that.  Take  that,  impudence!"  and  here  Hi's  tin 
cup  flew  over  Tom  's  head,  that  young  gentleman 
having  dodged  just  in  time. 

But,  though  Hiram  was  yet  "weakly,"  he  was  now 
able  to  work  quite  regularly  in  his  claim.  He  had  in- 
sisted on  timbering  the  rude  tunnel;  he  had  a  dread  of 
its  caving  in  upon  him  "again,"  as  he  expressed  it — 
for  Hi  had  never  been  able  to  get  rid  of  the  idea  that 
he  had  been  injured  by  the  falling  of  the  roof  of  his 
tunnel.  As  a  matter  of  opinion,  he  "allowed"  that 
Doctor  Carson  was  right;  but  he  habitually  spoke  of 
his  wounds  as  the  result  of  "that  cave."  He  was 
afraid  the  roof  would  "drop  again." 

"  But  the  roof  did  not  drop,  Hiram,"  said  the  doctor, 
one  day  when  Hiram  was  discussing  the  prospects  of 
his  claim. 

"How  did  my  head  get  caved  in,  then  ?"  demanded 
Hi.     "That's  what  I  want  to  know." 

"And  that's  what  /  want  to  know,"  replied  the 
doctor,  fixing  his  keen  eyes  on  Hi's  face.     "You  are 


358  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

found  wounded  and  bleeding  in  the  road,  a  quarter  of 
a  mile  from  the  claim.  You  say  you  have  been  caved 
in  upon  by  the  tunnel.  But  the  tunnel  is  not  dis- 
turbed in  the  least.  To  this  day  it  is  all  sound  over- 
head. Nobody  supposes  you  would  tell  a  wrong  story 
about  your  misadventure,  Hiram.  But  how  were  you 
injured  ^    That's  what  we  want  to  know." 

Hi  had  only  one  story  to  tell.  And  if  Doctor  Carson 
had  any  theory  of  his  own  (and  very  likely  he  had), 
he  gave  no  hint  of  what  it  was.  In  his  occasional 
"spells,"  as  Tom  impatiently  called  them.  Hi  maun- 
dered on  about  his  jacket  being  heavy  and  the  day 
warm;  and  he  almost  always  pleaded  with  some  imag- 
inary comrade  that  "it"  was  "in  the  other  pocket." 

Mont  gently  tried  at  such  times  to  get  Hi  to  explain. 
"What  is  in  the  other  pocket,  old  fellow.?  Where  is 
your  pocket?"  But  Hi  only  struggled  painfully,  and 
begged,  "Don't  hit  me  ag'in  !    Oh,  don't!" 

It  was  pitiful.  "I  give  it  up,"  said  Mont.  It  was 
no  use  trying  to  draw  the  secret  from  him. 

Hi  murmured  and  grumbled  a  great  deal  about  his 
lost  bag  of  dust.  Nevertheless,  he  was  now  meeting 
with  good  fortune  in  his  claim.  He  worked  at  a  great 
disadvantage.  Tom  was  not  a  valuable  assistant,  and 
Hi's  health  was  very  feeble  indeed.  He  seemed  to  have 
lost  much  of  his  old  ambition,  though  he  was  covetous 
and   avaricious.     Sometimes  he  was  obliged  to  leave 


NEWS  AND   DISCOVERIES  359 

off  work  for  several  days  at  a  time.  When  he  went 
back  to  his  claim,  he  felt  more  like  sitting  down  in  the 
mouth  of  the  tunnel  and  musing — while  Tom  went 
gunning  for  gophers — than  striking  with  pick  or  shovel. 

"Just  my  ornery  luck,"  he  said,  discontentedly  one 
day,  as  he  sat  complaining  to  himself  by  a  heap  of  dirt 
thrown  out  from  the  tunnel.  He  aimlessly  threw  the 
lumps  of  sand  and  dried  earth  at  a  stake  which  marked 
a  miner's  "corner"  near  by.  And  as  he  sat  tossing 
the  dirt,  his  thoughts  were  not  in  the  diggings.  He 
was  thinking  of  Nance. 

"Powerful  nice  gal!"  muttered  Hi  to  himself. 
"Chirky  and  peart,  but  dreffle  sassy.  My  gosh,  what 
a  tongue  !" — and  Hi  let  fly  another  lump  at  Gubbins's 
corner  stake.     "Just  my  ornery  luck!" 

Then  he  got  half-way  up,  and,  trembling  with  ex- 
citement, crawled  on  his  hands  and  knees  to  the  little 
heap  of  earth  which  had  fallen  apart  where  it  struck 
the  stake.  He  snatched  the  crumbly  mass  in  his  hands. 
It  was  whitish-yellow,  sprinkled  with  small  angular 
bits  of  pure  white  stone;  but  all  through  it  were  lumps, 
streaks,  and  jagged  wires  of  gold. 

"Gosh  all  Friday!  I've  struck  a  quartz  lead!  I've 
struck  it!  I've  struck  it!"  And  Hi,  in  a  delirium  of 
joy,  pressed  the  precious  handful  to  his  lips,  as  if  to 
devour  it. 

Tom,  who  was  patiently  waiting  by  the  side  of  a 


36o  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

gopher-hole  on  the  hill-side  above,  his  pistol  ready  for 
the  first  appearance  of  its  persecuted  tenant,  looked 
down  and  saw  his  brother's  extraordinary  actions. 

"Another  spell  onto  him,  I  s'pose,"  complained  Tom 
and  he  sauntered  down  to  Hi's  relief. 

Poor  Hiram  looked  vacantly  at  his  brother  when  he 
came  down,  brushed  the  glittering  dust  off  his  face 
with  a  great  effort,  and  said:  "Don't  hit  me  ag'in! 
It's  in  the  other  pocket." 


CHAPTER  XXVIII 

DEVELOPMENTS 

The  news  that  a  rich  quartz  lead  had  been  discovered 
on  Brush  Hill  created  a  tremendous  excitement  in 
Hoosiertown.  Only  a  few  claims  had  been  located  in 
that  region,  and  those  that  were  worked  were  only 
considered  as  paying  fairly.  Before  night  every  foot 
of  ground  along  the  hill  was  taken  up.  Very  little  was 
then  known  about  quartz-mining.  Here  and  there, 
deposits  of  decayed  yellowish  quartz  rock,  richly 
speckled  with  gold,  had  been  found.  These  had  usually 
been  dug  out  speedily  with  pick  and  shovel.  The  rock 
was  easily  pulverized,  and,  being  pounded  in  an  iron 
mortar,  or  even  between  two  smooth  stones,  the  golden 
grains  in  it  were  thus  loosened  and  secured.  But 
much  of  this  flint-like  quartz  was  pure  white  and  as 
hard  as  adamant.  The  miners  looked  at  it  covetously 
and  passed  on  to  find  gold  in  a  more  accessible  con- 
dition. 

Lately,  however,  there  had  been  some  experiments  at 

quartz-mining  with  machinery  in  the  southern  mines. 

There  ran  a  r"umor  that  fabulous  sums  had  been  made 

by  crushing  the  gold-bearing  quartz  in  the  Mariposa 

361 


362  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

country,  where  some  new  kind  of  machinery  had  been 
put  up  for  that  purpose.  Then,  too,  there  came  in- 
flaming reports  of  rich  quartz  mines  being  found  and 
worked  in  Tuolumne.  The  rock  was  crushed  by 
"arastras,"  as  the  Mexicans  called  them,  a  simple  in- 
vention of  old  times.  The  arastra  was  something  like 
a  huge  grindstone,  revolving  on  an  axis,  one  end  of 
which  was  made  fast  to  an  upright  turning-post  in 
the  centre  of  a  circle,  and  the  other  end  was  moved 
around  by  mules  or  cattle.  The  great  stone,  revolving 
over  the  half-broken  quartz  which  was  laid  in  a  large 
circular  trough,  crushed  all  before  it.  Powdered 
quartz  and  free  gold  were  gathered  up  in  a  wet  paste, 
and  the  precious  stuff  was  then  separated  from  the 
refuse. 

Very  soon,  quartz-mining  became  "all  the  rage," 
and  everybody  wanted  to  try  it.  The  rude  mortar  and 
arastra  served  to  extract  only  the  larger  particles  of 
gold;  probably,  more  was  wasted  than  was  saved. 
The  miners,  in  their  eagerness  to  crack  open  the  rocky 
ledges,  snatch  the  large  pieces  of  gold,  and  go  away, 
threw  aside  everything  that  did  not  promise  them  an 
immediate  return. 

The  fame  of  the  Mariposa  and  Tuolumne  quartz 
ledges  had  reached  Hoosiertown  and  Brush  Hill  dig- 
gings. Some  restless  prospectors  had  dug  down  below 
the  surface  where  they  had  found  lumps  of  white  rock 


DEVELOPMENTS  363 

sticking  up  through  the  soil,  Hke  a  coat-sleeve  out 
at  the  elbow.  But  nobody  had  found  gold-bearing 
quartz;  it  was  thought  an  unlikely  thing  that  it  should 
exist  here.  And  when  Hi's  discovery  was  announced, 
everybody  said  at  once  that  they  "always  knew  there 
was  quartz  in  that  hill."  In  Hi's  little  tunnel,  now 
famous,  he  found  a  thin  vein  of  rock  just  cropping 
above  the  irregular  floor  of  the  chamber.  It  was  a 
loose,  friable  sort  of  rock,  full  of  cracks  and  holes, 
easily  scraped  off  with  a  strong  shovel,  yellowish- 
white  and  gray  in  color,  and  mottled  with  gold.  Hi 
had  shovelled  up  some  of  this  loose  rock,  which  soon 
became  covered  with  dirt,  and  was  dumped  out  with 
what  was  thought  to  be  worthless  stuff".  When  Hi 
accidentally  cracked  open  one  of  these  rich  lumps  of 
golden  rock,  it  flashed  on  him  that  he  had  at  last 
found  what  the  whole  country  was  looking  for — a 
quartz  lead. 

"A  fool  for  luck,"  said  some  of  the  Hoosiertown 
miners  when  they  found  that  Hi  had  blundered  on  a 
mine  of  gold.  Then  they  rushed  out  to  Brush  Hill  and 
covered  it  over  with  stakes  and  notices  of  claims. 
Men  who  were  making  fortunes  in  the  river  diggings, 
or  in  the  ravine  claims,  dropped  everything  else  and 
seized  upon  quartz-mining  as  affording  the  very  short- 
est road  to  riches.  It  was  early  in  the  forenoon  when 
Hi,  weak  and  overcome  by  his  sudden  discovery,  had 


364  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

fallen  in  a  fit.  Tom,  with  great  amazement,  had  wiped 
the  golden  dust  and  dirt  from  his  brother's  face,  and 
had  dragged  him  into  the  cool  shadow  of  the  tun- 
nel, where  he  gradually  recovered.  It  was  noon  when 
Hiram,  feverish  and  trembling,  was  able  to  examine 
his  vein  of  quartz  and  gold,  and  tell  his  nearest  neigh- 
bors of  his  luck.  Before  the  sun  went  down  that  night, 
Brush  Hill  was  looked  upon  as  a  bank  on  which  hun- 
dreds of  men  were  to  present  checks  in  the  shape  of 
picks  and  shovels,  and  draw  gold  in  any  quantity. 

Hiram  was  the  hero  of  the  hour.  He  bore  his  fame 
with  indifference,  and  announced  his  readiness  to  sell 
out  and  go  back  to  the  States.  Everybody  wanted  to 
buy.  Nobody  was  willing  to  say  what  the  claim  was 
worth.  Some  men  thought  it  ought  to  bring  one  hun- 
dred thousand  dollars.  There  were  those  who  said 
that  capitalists  at  the  Bay,  as  San  Francisco  was 
called,  would  jump  at  a  chance  to  give  two  millions 
for  it. 

**Two  millions!"  whispered  Hi  to  himself.  "What 
a  heap  of  money  !    Is  there  so  much  in  this  yere  world  ^ " 

Nevertheless,  nobody  oflFered  to  buy  the  mine  at 
any  specified  price,  and  Hi  and  Tom  went  on  slowly 
digging  in  it. 

One  Sunday  morning,  when  Hoosiertown  was  given 
up  to  the  cleaning,  cooking,  mending,  and  letter- 
writing,  with  which  that  day  was  always  occupied  in 


DEVELOPMENTS  365 

the  mines,  a  rough-bearded,  red-shirted,  booted  miner 
rode  down  the  divide  just  south  of  Table  Mountain, 
and  made  his  way  into  Hoosiertown.  Stopping  at  the 
express  office,  a  log  hut  of  noble  dimensions,  he  in- 
quired for  "the  boys  from  Crowbait,  whosumdever 
they  might  be." 

He  was  directed  to  the  cabin  where  Mont,  Barnard, 
Hi,  and  the  three  boys  were  gathered  about  the  door. 
Without  wasting  words  on  the  loungers  at  the  express 
office,  he  cantered  across  the  branch,  dismounted,  and 
saluted  the  party  with,  "Howdy?    Nice  day." 

Seating  himself  on  Arty's  chopping-block,  he  opened 
his  errand. 

"Which  of  you  fellers  is  Hi  Fender.?" 

"That's  my  name,"  answered  Hi. 

"How's  yer  head?"  he  asked,  with  a  curious  grin. 
"I'm  from  Cherokee  Flat,  t'other  side  of  the  divide." 

"Tolerable-like,"  said  Hi.  "Glad  to  see  ye.  My 
head's  improvin',  thank  ye.    How's  yerself  ?" 

"It's  just  like  this,"  said  the  stranger,  in  a  queer 
and  inconsequent  way.  "We  caught  a  feller  a-robbin' 
Kentucky  Bob's  sluice,  over  to  Cherokee,  last  night. 
Bob  let  drive  at  him  and  shot  him  in  the  leg — winged 
him,  so  to  speak.  Dark  night,  yer  see,  or  Bob'd  done 
better.  Anyhow,  the  thief  couldn^t  get  away,  and  we 
boys  turned  out  and  tied  him  up  for  the  night.  This 
mornin'  he  war  tried.     Do  yer  foUer  me  ?" 


366  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

His  listeners  assured  him  that  they  understood  him, 
and  he  went  on. 

"When  he  was  gone  through  with,  we  Hghted  on  a 
bag  of  dust  stowed  away  in  his  traps.  Look  yar,"  and 
the  man  opened  a  buckskin  bag  and  poured  into  the 
crown  of  his  hat  a  handful  of  coarse  gold.  "This 
yar,"  he  said,  parting  some  grains  of  light-colored 
yellow  metal  from  the  other,  "is  Cherokee  gold.  All 
on  our  side  of  the  divide,  leastways  as  fur  as  we've 
prospected,  is  like  that  thar.  This  yar," — and  here  his 
stumpy  finger  poked  out  some  coarser  bits  of  dark 
reddish  gold, —  "this  yar  came  from  your  side  of  Table 
Mountain.  Brush  Hill  gold,  bein'  a  gold-sharp,  I 
mought  say." 

Nobody  replied. 

"Now  yer  see  that  when  we  went  through  this  yar 
galoot,  we  found  his  buckskin  full  of  all  sorts  and 
kinds.  Sure  as  shootin'  he  had  been  playin'  it  low  down 
on  any  number  of  honest  miners.  Not  bein'  an  honest 
miner  himself,  he  had  bin  goin'  for  everything  in 
sight  on  both  sides  of  Table  Mount'in.  D'yer  foller 
my  meanin'  ? " 

Mont,  rather  impatiently,  said  that  they  did,  and 
would  Hke  the  rest  of  his  story. 

"Pr^-cisely,"  said  the  man,  "and  jest  what  I  was 
comin'  to  when  you  interrupted  me.  Seein'  as  how  this 
chap  didn't  hev  long  to  live,  we  gave  him  warnin'  to 


DEVELOPMENTS  367 

make  a  clean  breast  of  it,  which  he  did.  He  hadn't 
sold  no  dust,  but  had  packed  it  away  in  holes  and 
crevices,  where  we  found  most  of  it.  This  yar  dark 
gold,  from  the  south  of  the  divide,  he  allowed  was 
some  out  of  a  lot  that  he  got  away  with  belongin'  to  a 
chap  by  the  name  of  Fender.  Yar  it  is  writ  out,  yer 
see,  by  the  clerk  of  the  meetin'.  'Hiram  Fender,' 
which  is  you,  accordin'  to  'pearances."  And  the  man 
saluted  Hi,  with  gravity. 

Hiram  looked  at  him  painfully  and  with  a  troubled 
expression,  and  said: 

*'I  allow  he  must  have  found  my  bag  when  I  dropped, 
the  day  I  was  caved  in  on." 

"Nary  time,  stranger.  He  confessed  that  he  laid 
for  you  better'n  four  days,  a-waitin'  fur  you  to  get 
where  he  could  knock  you  over  and  go  fur  yer  buck- 
skin. One  day,  he  war  on  the  nigh  side  of  Table 
Mount'in  as  yer  went  down  the  trail  from  yer  claim. 
Yer  slouched  along  right  under  whar  he  war,  least- 
ways so  he  allowed  to  us.  Then  he  rocked  yer.  The 
first  dornick  took  yer  plum'  on  the  cabesa,  and  yer 
dropped  in  yer  tracks.  He  let  fly  another  at  yer, 
climbed  down  the  bluflP,  went  through  yer  clothes, 
nipped  yer  buckskin,  and  Ht  out.  Leastways,  so  he 
let  on  to  us  at  the  meetin'." 

"Good  Heavens!"  said  Mont,  "this  is  an  amazing 
story!" 


368  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

Arthur,  whose  eyes  had  opened  wider  and  wider 
while  the  story  was  being  told,  exclaimed: 

"Do  you  know  this  man's  name?" 

"Well,  I  disremember.  Usual  he  war  called  Lame 
Bill,  but  I  allow  it  war  some  such  name  as  Bunch." 

"Bunce!"  cried  the  boys. 

"You've  hit  it.     Bunce  war  his  name." 

*'fFas  his  name  .?"  said  Barnard.    "  You  don't  mean 


"Pre-cise\y.  What  little  he  had  to  say,  he  said 
a-standin'  on  a  wagon-box,  with  a  rope  around  his 
neck,  and  it  over  a  convenient  sycamore  handy  by. 
The  boys  war  a-buryin'  of  him  when  I  left." 

"Lynched  .?"  said  the  boys  with  horror. 

"Lynched  it  war.  But  everything  reg'lar.  He 
couldn't  hev  asked  for  no  sq'arer  game.  Chairman, 
clerk,  rope-committee,  and  everything  accordin'  to 
rule.  Oh,  we're  a  law-abidin'  lot  on  our  side  of  the 
divide." 

This  was  slightly  sarcastic,  for  there  had  been  some 
scandalous  irregularities  reported  of  the  Hoosiertown 
people. 

"Law-abidin'  people  and  travel  on  the  sq'ar.' 
Your  friend  Bunch  went  off  Hke  a  lamb." 

"Did  he  really  say  that  he  dropped  rocks  on  my 
head  ?"  asked  Hi,  who  could  not  believe  this  story. 

"Sartin,  sartin.     Didn't  yer  feel  'em?" 


DEVELOPMENTS  369 

"No,"  said  Mont.  "Hi  has  never  had  a  clear  idea 
of  what  happened.  The  first  blow  made  him  insen- 
sible, probably,  and  his  brain  was  so  affected  by  the 
hurt  that  he  had  a  notion  that  he  had  been  caved  on 
while  in  the  tunnel.     He  never  knew  what  hurt  him." 

"Sho,  now!" 

"It  is  a  very  strange  case.  Did  Bunce  say  how  Hi 
behaved  when  he  was  robbed  of  his  bag  of  dust  V 

"I  disremember  pertickler.  But  he  did  say  that 
while  he  war  a-goin'  through  yer  pardner  thar,  that  he 
sorter  freshened  up  a  bit,  and  sung  out  to  Bunch,  so 
he  did,  and  says,  'Don't  hit  me  ag'in;  it's  in  the  other 
pocket' — meanin'  the  dust,  yer  see.  With  that. 
Bunch  he  clips  him  another,  which  finishes  him,  he 
allowed.  Then  he  grabs  the  buckskin,  does  Bunch, 
and  breaks  for  tall  timber." 

"The  story  is  complete.  Hi,  my  boy,"  added  Barney. 
"I  guess  Dr.  Carson  had  it  all  figured  out,  except  as  to 
the  robber.     You  know  Arty  saw  Bunce  from  the  hill." 

"I'm  clean  beat,  and  don't  know  anything  about 
it,"  said  Hiram,  discontentedly.  And  he  sat  back  from 
the  group  with  the  air  of  one  who  has  no  further  in- 
terest in  a  discussion. 

"And  yar,"  said  the  stranger,  producing  an  empty 
buckskin  bag,  "yar  is  a  bag  that  we  allowed  belonged 
over  yar.  Hit's  got  'Boston'  onto  it,  and  you  chaps 
hail  from  thereaway,  they  say." 


370  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

"My  bag!"  exclaimed  Arty.  "I  marked  that  on 
there  and  gave  the  bag  to  Hi.  Was  there  anything 
in  it?" 

"No,"  said  the  man.  "Hit  war  stowed  inside  of  an- 
other buckskin.  Both  on  'em  war  buried  near  a  lone 
pine,  where  we  found  'em  'cordin'  to  directions." 

It  was  then  explained  that  the  "meetin'  "  at  Chero- 
kee had  directed  this  envoy  to  leave  with  Hiram 
Fender  the  gold  which  had  been  sent  over.  It  belonged 
to  nobody  at  Cherokee.  It  was  about  equal  in  weight 
to  the  darker  gold  found  among  Bunce's  deposits.  The 
rest  had  been  confiscated,  by  popular  decree,  for  the 
relief  of  a  distressed  miner  who  was  laid  up  with  the 
rheumatism. 

"One  more  question  before  you  go,"  said  Mont. 
"Did  Bunce  confess  any  other  crimes  before  he  was 
— hanged  .?" 

"Heaps,  heaps  on  'em,"  replied  the  man.  "But 
none  that  I  set  much  by.  Except  he  denied  that  he 
stole  Columbus's  money  at  Loup  Fork,  as  one  of  our 
fellers  said  he  did.  It  war  his  pardner,  Eph  Mullet, 
that  did  that.  Leastways,  so  Lame  Bill  allowed.  Hit 
don't  matter  now,  anyhow." 

So  saying,  he  swung  himself  into  his  saddle,  touched 
his  horse's  flank,  clattered  over  the  branch,  down  the 
trail,  and  disappeared  in  the  thickets  which  covered 
the  divide. 


DEVELOPMENTS  371 

The  boys  looked  at  each  other  with  a  feeling  of  awe. 
Bill  Bunce  had  at  last  met  with  his  fate.  He  would 
lie  and  steal  no  more.  With  his  lawless  taking  off  had 
come  the  explanation  of  Hi's  mysterious  disaster. 
Here  was  conclusive  proof  that  Hi  had  been  living 
under  a  strange  delusion.  Indeed,  he  was  still  deluded. 
His  comrades  were  satisfied  that  he  had  been  way- 
laid, cruelly  wounded,  and  robbed  by  Bunce.  Arty  and 
Johnny  had  seen  the  crime  from  the  hill,  though  they 
had  not  seen  Hiram  in  the  road  below.  Arty  went 
over  the  whole  story  again,  point  by  point. 

Hi  only  said:  "Boys,  it  gets  me.  I  give  it  up.  I 
s'pose  you're  right.  But  I  allow  I  shall  never  know 
how  it  happened." 


CHAPTER  XXIX 

RECKONING    UP   THE    GAINS 

Hi's  "luck"  did  not  seem  to  desert  him,  although 
nobody  made  a  distinct  offer  to  buy  his  quartz  lead. 
There  was  much  talk  about  capitalists  coming  up  from 
the  Bay  in  search  of  just  such  investments  as  this. 
Someliow,  they  never  came,  and  Hi  went  on  with  his 
work,  his  comrades  occasionally  giving  him  a  helping 
hand.  A  week  had  passed  since  his  great  discovery, 
and  the  people  who  had  taken  up  claims  on  Brush  Hill 
were  becoming  discontented  with  their  failure  to 
"strike  it  rich."  Hi  steadily  took  out  gold-bearing 
quartz  in  paying  quantities;  the  gold  was  pounded  out 
in  a  big  iron  mortar,  brought  at  great  expense  from 
San  Francisco. 

One  day  Tom  was  industriously  picking  away  at  the 
loose  vein  of  rock  inside  the  tunnel,  when  he  uttered  a 
wild  shriek,  which  made  Hi  drop  his  basket  nervously 
and  hurry  to  the  spot.  Tom  had  cleft  off  a  thin  layer 
of  rock  which  slanted  downward  beneath  the  surface. 
About  six  inches  below  this  was  another  similar  layer, 

and  between  these  two,   as  far  as  uncovered,  was  a 

372 


RECKONING  UP  THE  GAINS  373 

reddish-gray  deposit  of  rotten  rock,  veined  and  mot- 
tled through  and  through  with  virgin  gold.  It  was 
nearly  one-half  gold,  glittering,  sparkling,  and  in  all 
sorts  of  shapes.  Some  of  it  was  hke  ferns,  in  long 
and  leafy  sprays;  some  was  like  sheets  of  foil,  crumpled 
and  tumbled  in  the  hand;  and  some  was  in  thick  splin- 
ters, as  if  it  had  been  hammered  into  the  crevices  of 
the  rock  ages  ago,  before  these  quartz  crystals  had  be- 
gun to  decay. 

Hi  uttered  a  howl  of  delight,  and  seized  the  pick 
from  Tom's  unwilling  hand.  In  a  moment,  he  had 
laid  bare  the  vein,  which  did  not  extend  quite  across 
the  tunnel.  TrembHng  with  eagerness,  he  held  the 
candle  down  to  the  shining  mass,  and  said:  ''Millions  ! 
millions!  millions!" 

"And  I  struck  it,"  added  Tom,  proudly. 

"So  you  did.  Tommy,  my  boy,"  said  Hi,  fondly. 
"So  you  did,  and  a  right  peart  striker  you  be.  You 
shall  have  a  specimen  out  of  this  for  a  buzzum-pin,  so 
you  shall;  and  we'll  go  back  to  Sugar  Grove  and  hold  up 
our  heads  with  them  proud  Gashwilers  and  Perkinses 
and  all  the  rest." 

And  Hi  lovingly  laid  a  golden  leaf  in  his  hands  and 
doubled  it  up,  as  if  in  mere  wantonness  of  wealth.  It 
was  a  wonderful  thing  to  be  able  to  handle  one's  own 
gold  like  that — ^just  as  if  it  were  sheets  of  common  tin. 

"Now,  you  Tom,  just  keep  your  mouth  shet  about 


374  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

this.  Don't  let  it  get  around.  We'll  have  the  whole 
camp  down  on  us  if  ye  do." 

"What!"  cried  Tom,  opening  his  eyes  very  wide. 
"Not  tell  Mont  and  the  boys?" 

"Sartinly  not!  sartinly  not!"  replied  his  brother, 
and  his  face  grew  haggard  and  anxious  as  he  regarded 
the  glittering  vein.  "Nothin'  to  nobody.  D'ye  hear 
that?" 

"Yes,  I  hear,"  said  Tom,  who  was  bursting  to  rush 
out  and  tell  the  news. 

That  night  Hi  went  staggering  home  with  the  pro- 
ceeds of  his  day's  work,  mingled  with  bits  of  broken 
quartz  with  gold  sticking  to  them. 

"What  luck  to-day?"  asked  Doctor  Carson,  check- 
ing his  horse  as  he  rode  past  the  two  brothers. 

"Oh,  just  ornery,  just  ornery.  Doctor.  Times  is 
dreffle  mixed  up,  here,"  answered  Hi,  with  something 
like  a  whine. 

"Golly!  what  a  whopper!"  cried  Tom,  as  the  doc- 
tor rode  off  with  a  pleasant  word  and  smile  for  the 
boys. 

"  Keep  yer  head  shet,  will  yer,  young  one  ?  You  are 
the  talkinest  creature  I  ever  came  acrost.  Didn't  I 
say  that  things  was  mixed  ?  Ain't  that  gettin'  around 
the  truth  without  strainin'  it  ?" 

But  Hi  felt  guilty;  and  when  he  remembered  how 
Doctor  Carson  had  guessed  out  the  whole  truth  about 


RECKONING  UP  THE  GAINS  375 

the  affair  of  Bunce,  he  was  afraid  that  he  might  some- 
how divine  the  golden  secret  of  the  mine. 

When  Hi  and  Tom  reached  the  cabin,  they  found 
the  rest  of  the  party  in  great  excitement.  Arty  had 
that  day  found  in  the  claim  two  nuggets,  or  chispas, 
worth  at  least  five  hundred  dollars  each. 

** Aren't  they  beauties,  HiV  asked  Johnny;  and  he 
rolled  the  potato-shaped  lumps  over  and  over  on  the 
supper-table, 

"Hang  it  all,  boys,"  said  Hi,  with  a  sudden  burst  of 
candor.  "I  didn't  mean  to  tell.  But  just  look  at  this 
yere."  And  he  poured  out  the  glittering  contents  of 
his  sack. 

"There  now!"  exclaimed  Tom.  "You've  been  and 
gone  and  told,  and  I  kept  shut  about  it!" 

"Didn't  mean  to  tell.''"  said  Mont,  with  a  look  of 
surprise.  "You  don't  mean  to  say  that  you  would 
keep  the  good  news  from  us.  Hi .? " 

Hi  blushed  and  explained  that  he  wanted  to  keep  the 
news  of  his  rich  strike  from  the  rest  of  the  camp.  He 
could  not  keep  it  from  the  boys  when  he  saw  how 
frank  they  were.  But  it  was  all  out  now.  Would 
the  boys  say  nothing  about  it  for  the  present? 

There  was  no  need.  The  very  next  day.  Hi,  scoop- 
ing out  the  contents  of  the  rift  of  rock  in  which  his 
treasure  lay,  suddenly  struck  his  pick  against  a  hard 
wall.    It  was  the  virgin  quartz — pure,  white,  adaman- 


376  THE  BOY  EMIGRANTS 

tine,  and  without  a  flaw  or  seam.  In  this  shallow 
fissure  the  decayed  gold-bearing  quartz  had  been  shut 
up  for  ages.  A  day's  work  had  been  sufficient  to  scrape 
it  all  out;  and  the  pocket  was  empty. 

Hi  nervously  plied  his  pick  and  shovel  in  all  direc- 
tions. For  hours  he  dug  and  scratched  at  the  rock, 
above,  below,  to  the  left  and  to  the  right.  In  vain; 
only  barren  quartz  met  him  on  all  sides.  Hi  wiped  his 
heated  head  and  shoulders  and  sat  down  to  rest,  at 
last. 

"There's  no  use  talkin',  Tom.  This  yere  claim's 
played  out.     I'm  goin'  home." 

And,  in  spite  of  Tom's  remonstrances,  Hiram  dehber- 
ately  shouldered  his  bag  of  ore  and  mining-tools,  and 
set  his  face  toward  the  tunnel's  mouth.  Reaching  the 
open  air,  he  blew  out  his  candle,  laid  it  carefully  away 
in  a  crevice  of  rock,  as  if  he  was  going  away  for  the 
night.     But,  turning  about,  he  said: 

**Good-by,  old  tunnel.  You've  given  me  sorrer,  and 
you've  given  me  gold.  We  part  friends.  I'm  bound 
for  the  States !" 

"To  the  States!"  re-echoed  the  boys  in  grand 
chorus,  when  Hiram,  that  night,  announced  his  sud- 
den determination. 

"Yes.  I've  made  my  pile,  you  see.  Not  millions, 
nor  even  hundred  thousands,  but  more'n  I  ever  thought 
for  when  I  started.  It  don't  pay,  this  Hvin'  in  a  hole 
in  the  ground." 


RECKONING  UP  THE  GAINS  377 

"Well,  I  must  say,"  said  Barney,  with  deliberation, 
"this  is  a  new  freak  for  you.  What  has  happened  to 
change  your  mind  about  making  that  million  that  you 
thought  you  had  struck?" 

"Oh,  I  say,  I  wonder  if  it  isn't  because  Nance  and 
her  folks  are  going  home  ?"  broke  in  httle  Johnny,  with 
great  simplicity, 

"Yer  talk  too  much,  youngster,"  interrupted  Hi, 
wrathfully;  but  he  blushed  red,  nevertheless. 

"We  may  as  well  all  go  together,"  said  Arty.  "We've 
sent  home  five  thousand  dollars,  all  told.  Haven't  we 
got  as  much  more,  share  and  share  alike,  Barney 
Crogan  .?" 

They  took  account  of  stock,  went  over  all  their 
gains,  and  found  that  they  would  have,  after  selling 
their  claim,  thirty  thousand  dollars.  This  was  a  for- 
tune to  the  boys.  Divided,  it  gave  Barney  and  Arthur 
fifteen  thousand  dollars  between  them,  and  the  same 
to  Mont  and  his  little  partner. 

Hi  and  his  brother,  notwithstanding  their  occasional 
"spurts  of  luck,"  had  not  accumulated  quite  that 
total  sum.  Hi's  sickness  had  disabled  him,  various 
expenses  had  eaten  into  the  profits,  and  the  gold  never 
turned  out  to  be  so  much  in  value  as  it  looked. 

The  boys  decided  to  go  home. 


CHAPTER  XXX 

HOMEWARD    BOUND 

People  moved  suddenly  in  those  days.  A  miner 
would  go  to  his  cabin  at  night,  grimy  with  a  day's 
work,  and  leaving  his  pick  and  shovel  in  his  claim, 
next  day,  clad  in  a  "biled"  (or  white)  shirt,  and  un- 
comfortable in  "store  clothes,"  he  would  wave  a 
farewell  from  the  top  of  the  stage,  or  from  the  back  of 
his  mule,  as  he  took  his  way  to  Sacramento,  San  Fran- 
cisco, and  the  States. 

Early  in  September,  Jehiel  Bush,  seedy  but  cheery, 
dropped  his  mining  kit  in  front  of  the  Hoosiertown 
express  office,  and  said  to  a  noisy  party  of  card-players 
within: 

"Can  any  of  this  gay  and  garrulous  crowd  tell  a 
passing  stranger  where  to  find  the  Boston  boys?" 

"Reckon  you'll  find  'em  down  about  the  Bay  some- 
what, strannger.  It's  your  deal,  Kaintuck,"  and  the 
man  went  on  with  his  play. 

"Sho!  you  don't  tell  me  so!  Gone  to  the  Bay! 
Made  their  pile  ?" 

"They've  made  right  smart,  I  hear,"  explained  one 
of  the  lounging  group.  "Ye  see,  Nance  she  went  with 
the  old  man  Dobbs.     Then  the  feller  that  struck  it 

378 


HOMEWARD   BOUND  379 

up  on  Brush  Hill,  he  went.  Then  that  smart  Boston 
chap,  he  went,  and  the  whole  kit  and  caboodle  of  'em 
went." 

"To  the  States?"  said  Bush,  aghast. 

"That's  the  size  of  it,  strannger." 

Bush  looked  down  dejectedly,  and  murmured: 
"And  I'm  clean  busted  !  Oh,  it  gets  'em  !  it  gets  'em  ! 
One  gal  like  that  can  clear  out  a  hull  camp."  So 
saying,  he  shouldered  his  pack  and  moved  on. 

In  those  days  there  were  steamers  plying  between 
San  Francisco  and  Panama,  laden  with  homeward- 
bound  gold-hunters.  Now  and  then  there  was  a  fear- 
ful disaster,  and  hundreds  of  men,  with  their  faces 
turned  toward  home,  sunk  in  the  waters.  In  a  Httle 
space,  a  ship-load  of  hopefulness,  life,  manhood,  and 
treasure  was  swallowed  in  the  sea.  But,  safely  creep- 
ing down  the  coast,  across  the  hot  and  gorgeous  isthmus 
of  Panama,  and  up  the  boisterous  Atlantic,  went  our 
young  adventurers. 

It  was  a  happy  day  when  the  boys,  so  lately  from 
the  rough  wilds  of  California,  found  themselves  in 
the  glitter  and  excitement  of  New  York,  The  streets 
seemed  foreign  to  them,  and  the  great  stores  were 
almost  awful  in  their  magnificence.  But  their  thoughts 
ran  out  to  the  West,  where  father,  mother,  brothers, 
and  sisters  waited  for  them,  day  by  day.  It  was  hard 
parting  with  Mont;  but  he  manfully  insisted  that  it 


38o  THE   BOY  EMIGRANTS 

was  only  for  a  time.  They  should  meet  again,  and 
soon.  He  had  lost  his  taste  for  city  life;  he  would  go 
out  West,  and  settle  down  in  Lee  County,  by  and  by. 
So  he  sped  home  to  his  mother. 

In  the  houses  of  Stevens  and  Fender,  at  Sugar 
Grove,  there  was  great  rejoicing  when  the  fortunate 
young  gold-seekers,  like  seamen  from  the  waters,  came 
home  in  triumph.  Farmer  Stevens  and  Oliver  had 
gone  into  town  with  their  new  farm-wagon,  and,  meet- 
ing the  wanderers  at  the  stage,  had  brought  them  out, 
bag  and  baggage,  and  with  great  acclaim,  Arty  standing 
up  with  a  flag  handkerchief  on  a  ramrod,  as  the  party 
drove  up  the  farm-road.  It  was  like  the  last  act  in  a 
play,  when  all  is  happiness,  reunion,  and  congratu- 
lation. The  boys  who  had  gone  out  with  slender 
equipment,  followed  by  hopes  and  fears,  prayers  and 
forebodings,  had  come  again,  rejoicing  and  bringing 
their  golden  sheaves  with  them. 

"And  this  is  Httle  Johnny.^"  said  the  good  mother, 
when  Barney  and  Arty  had  been  welcomed  again  and 
again. 

"Yes,  mother,"  broke  in  Arthur.  "And  he  shall 
never  go  away,  shall  he  ^  Say  that's  so,  quick,  because 
you  know,"  and  the  lad  dropped  his  voice,  "he's  got 
no  home  unless  it  is  with  us." 

"Johnny  shall  stay  with  my  boys  ever  and  always, 
if  he  likes,"  said  the  mother. 


HOMEWARD  BOUND  381 

Barnard,  with  a  little  air  of  authority,  added:  "Fm 
Johnny's  guardian,  and  he  shall  stay  with  me." 

"My  son!"  said  the  home-mother,  her  kindly  arm 
about  the  orphan's  shoulder.  The  lad's  blue  eyes  were 
moist  as  he  kissed  his  new  mother.  He  was  at  home 
at  last. 

How  Johnny  came  into  his  own  again,  and  how  he 
sent  back  to  Mont  all  that  was  left  of  his  own  share 
of  the  gold,  when  he  was  once  more  settled — these 
and  other  things  can  be  left  to  the  imagination  of  the 
dear  young  folks  who  have  followed  the  varying  for- 
tunes of  the  Boy  Emigrants. 

Prosperity  came  back  to  the  Grove  from  the  Golden 
Land.  Barney,  Arty,  and  Johnny  told  their  adven- 
tures over  and  over  again  in  the  comfortable  home  of 
the  Stevens  family,  and  to  willing  ears. 

Old  man  Fender  thought  that  Hi  had  "missed  it'' 
by  leaving  his  mining  partners  and  striking  out  foi- 
himself.  If  Hi  had  not  been  ignorant,  he  said,  he 
would  have  been  more  patient  and  more  successful. 
So,  as  he  leans  over  his  fence-rail,  smoking  his  pipe 
at  eventide,  he  looks  at  the  tidy  Stevens  farm,  and 
mutters: 

"Tell  yer  what — eddication's  a  great  thing!" 

The  End 