THE
Story of the Sea
EDITED
BY
Assisted by Prof. J. K. Laughton. H. O. Arnold-Forster. M.P.. W. Laird Clowes, Herbert W. Wilson, etc. etc.
INTRODUCTORY.
REA DEBS of a certain collection of moving tales entitled " The World of Adventure" may recall the case of a boy called Hopson who ran away to sea and rose to be an admiral and, what is more, “ the pride of the British Navy,” in the days of good Queen Anne. He was an orphan, it will be remembered, on the parish books of Bonchureh village in the Isle of Wight ; and the parish authorities had bound him apprentice to a tailor. One day he was sitting alone and cross-legged on the shop-board,
when, lifting his eyes from the needle, he saw a British squadron coming round Dunnosc wit^h colours streaming and white canvas bellying over the blue tide. The sight of it was too much for him. Following his first and unconquerable impulse he sprang off the board, ran down to the beach, jumped into the first boat he saw, and pulling with all his might for the admiral's ship, was then and there entered as a volunteer.
Tire storyr goes on to relate how the admiral, next morning, fell in with a French squadron and how, in the engagem'ent that followed, young Hopson made a brilliant start in his naval career by climbing to the main-top-gallant mast-head of the French admiral’s ship, where he quietly struck and carried off her flag. But it is with the first part of the story that we are now concerned; for it illustrates as well as any story known, the imperative charm exercised by the sea on every British boy who has good adventurous blood in him. Something must be allowed, of course, for pride of race arid ancestry. To a native of these isles the Ocean must be very much more than so many billion feet of water impregnated with chloride of sodium and other
I

2
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
minerals. He will think of it rather as one of the glories of his birth and state, the approach and bulwark of his country, the floor upon which famous men have built the fabric of her empire. Says Mr. Stevenson—‘‘The prostrating experiences of foreigners between Calais and Dover have always an agreeable side to English prepossessions. A man from Bedfordshire who does not know one end of the ship from the other until she begins to move, swaggers among such persons with a sense of hereditary nautical experience. To suppose yourself endowed with natural parts for the sea because you are the countryman of Blake and mighty Nelson is perhaps just as unwarrantable as to imagine Scotch extraction a sufficient guarantee that you will look well in a kilt. But the feeling is there and seated beyond the reach of argument. We should consider ourselves unworthy of our descent if we did not share the arrogance of our progenitors, and please ourselves with the pretension that the sea is English. Even where it is looked upon by the guns and battlements of another nation we regard it as a kind of English cemetery, where the bones of our sea-faring fathers take their rest until the last trumpet.”
But the magic of the sea is more than this, and her secret incommunicable. Not only does her call drag the shop-boy from his board; but after she has ill-used him for a lifetime, tossing him in her savage arms and terrifying his soul at every turn with the grinning image of death, her spell is not lifted. " Gentlemen,” says Sind bad, beginning the narrative of his Sixth Voyage, “ you long without doubt to know how, after having been shipwrecked five times and escaping so many dangers, I could resolve again to tempt fortune and expose myself to new hardships ? I am myself astonished at my conduct when I reflect upon it.” Crusoe wearies on his country farm. Simon Danz smokes at home in his Dutch parlour and chats with the old ships’ captains whose “ talk is ever and ever the same ”; and as they talk-—•
“ Restless at times with heavy strides
He paces his parlour to and fro ;
He is like a ship that at anchor rides, And swings with the rising and falling tides, And tugs at her anchor-tow.
.	Voices mysterious far and near,
Sound of the wind and sound of the sea Are calling and whispering in his ear, ‘ Simon Danz 1 Why stayest thou here ?
Come forth and follow me 1
So he thinks he shall take to the sea again For one more cruise with his buccaneers----”
Statisticians will prove to us very satisfactorily that our Empire’s existence has come to depend upon our continued mastery of the sea; they will compare for us the extent of her coast line and that of other powers: they will do the same for her trade and startle us with such a table as the following;—
“TO KEEP FOREIGNERS FROM FOOLING US.”
3
	Value of Annual	Tonnage	Value of Annual		Tonnage
State*.	Trade.	of Merchant	States.	Trade.	of Merchant
	£	Shipping.		£	Shipping.
Great Britain	..	885,000,000	10,550,000	Italy		... 95,000,000	885,000
Germany 		531,000,000	1,385,000	Spain		... 48,000,000	531,000
France	...	..	352,000,0<>0	905,000	Norway and Sweden 40,000,000		1,970,000
Holland 		174,000,000	368,000	Turkey	..	... 30,000,000	203,000
Russia			16 2,000,000	430,000	Denmark ..	... 25,000,000	256,000
Austria-Hungary ..	121,000,000	290,000	Portugal ..	... 16,000,000	79,000
Belgium ...	..	110,000,000	189,000	Greece	..	... 9,000,000	278,000
Over eight hundred millions of pounds worth of trade, and ships engaged in it up to a tonnage of ten and a half millions, or considerably more than that of all the other European powers put together—and all this staked upon the sea and our ability to command it! Surely if ever question stood high above the intrigues of faction and the squabbles of party government, it is this. It was so in the days when the Great Blake, Admiral and General at Sea, said of his profession, “ It is not for us to mind State matters, but to keep foreigners from fooling us.” It is a hundred- times more certainly so to-day.
“ Who,” demanded Sir Graham Berry in a famous speech at the Colonial Institute, November 9th, 188(1, “who could estimate the loss involved in even a brief period of disaster to the Imperial Navy ? Any amount of money timely expended in preparation would be quite insignificant when compared with that possible calamity.”
Everyone knows the lines that this speech called forth from Tennyson:—
“ You, you, if you shall fail to understand
What England is, and what her all-in-all, On you will come the curse of all the land. Should this old England fall Which Nelson left so great
Her isle, the mightiest Ocean-power on earth, Our own fair isle, the lord of every sea—
Her fuller franchise—what would that he worth— Her ancient fame of Free-
Were she ... a fallen state 1 •	•	•	•	•
You, you, that have the ordering of her fleet, If you should only compass her disgrace, When all men starve, the wild mob's million feet
Will kick you from your place, But then too late, too late.”
And indeed, though of late years we teem to have awakened and are beginning to grasp some notion of the vast issues at stake, beneath the whole of England’s glorious naval history there runs a mean undercurrent of governmental and departmental bickering, parsimony and intrigue. Luckily for ns the "spirit of our fathers” has proved the big factor in the game, beyond
Digitized by
Google
4
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
computation by the statisticians and beyond elimination by the clerks and officeseekers at home. “ It is not for us to mind State matters, but to keep foreigners from fooling us ”—that has been the motto of the Naval profession, and probably no profession has inspired such disinterested affection or bred such a race of
“ FIOKTIKG HBB WAY, FOOT BY FOOT " (P- W
simple heroes. “ Captain Campbell,” said Lord Anson after the battle of Conflans, “ the King will knight you if you think proper.” “ ’Deed, my lord, I ken nae use that will be to me.” “But your lady may like the title.” “Weel, then. His Majesty may knight her if he pleases.” That is the kind of man who built our empire, and if another specimen be wanted, we may choose Captain Walton of the Canterbury. In the year 1717 Admiral Sir George Byng (afterwards Viscount Torrington) fell in with a powerful Spanish fleet of twenty-seven ships of war, besides bombs and fire-ships, commanded by Don Antonio Castanet, with four rear-admirals under him. Byng chased this Spanish fleet for a day and a night The Spaniards detached six of their ships, and Captain Walton of the Canterbury was told off, with five sail, to pursue them, while Byng went on and inflicted a crushing defeat on the main body of the enemy off Cape Passaro. Soon after his victory came the following despatch from Captain Walton, accounting for the six ships he had been bidden to chase—
“ Sir,—We have taken and destroyed all the Spanish ships and vessels which were upon the coast, the number as per margin.—I am, etc., G. Walton.”
We shall not be too fanciful, I think, in connecting this typical simplicity
Digitized by
Google
“THE WHOLE MYSTERY OF THE SEA.”
5
of manner and carelessness of fine speaking with that compelling fascination of the sea already alluded to. Nufiez de Balboa and his men, if you remember, stood
“ Silent, upon a peak in Darien,"
as, the first of Europeans, they gazed on the vast Pacific. " Were I asked,” says Mr. Clark Russell, “ to deliver my sense of the highest poetical interpretation of the deep, I should point into distant times, to some new and silent ocean on whose surface, furrowed for the first time by a fabric of man’s handiwork, floats some little bark with a deck-load of pensive, wondering, reverential men.” Some events loom too big for words in the memories of those who have actually gone through them. It is not Captain Kane, in his report, but Mr. Stevenson, in his history, who makes us hold our breath while we read of the Calliope with red-hot engines fighting her way, foot by foot, out of Apia harbour in the teeth of the hurricane. And the whole mystery of the sea, that has baffled even the greatest of poets, is not to be
TASDIBMCIBN (P- 7X
explained by the sailor who has felt it most deeply. Question him and he will very likely tell you that a seaman’s is “a dog’s life”: he may even go so far as to confirm Dr. Johnson’s opinion—" Why, sir, no man will be a sailor who has contrivance enough to get himself into a jail: for being in a ship
Digitized by
Google
6
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
is being in a jail, with the chance of being drowned.” But be chary how you believe this: for sailors are the first grumblers in the world, and it may very well happen that the very man who thus laments would eat his heart out if forced to spend six consecutive months ashore. After a week or two of idleness the whisper comes to him—
“ You have heard the beat of the off-shore wind And the thresh of the deep-sea rain;
You have heard the song—bow long! how long!
Pull out on the trail again ! ”
and out he follows it, like another Ulysses, " always roaming with a hungry heart”
You are an English boy with good adventurous blood in you, and you are rightly eager to know something of The Story of the Sea, to examine that inheritance which covers nearly three-fourths of our planet and is perhaps the chief glory of your blood and state. The subject, of course, is really inexhaustible, and nothing short of a grand encyclopedia could pretend to do it justice. These pages do but undertake to give you a lively sketch of the sea, its nature and its mysteries, and of man's high performances upon it. They will tell of the Ocean itself, and the mountains, plains, valleys and forests in its depths with the teeming animal life that inhabits these—a life ranging from the tiniest germ to the leviathan, or even, it may be, the great sea-serpent: of the treasures of earth, from the sunken galleon to the Electric cable, that lie imbedded in the ooze and tangle of Davy Jones’s locker: of storms, hurricanes, whirlpools, waterspouts, tidal races and impetuous currents : of the white deserts that lie around the poles, and of tropical islets shining like emeralds on the bosom of the Pacific: of great voyagers and sea-captains, heroic commanders, sea-rovers, pirates and buccaneers : of hardy 11 toilers of the sea ”—fishermen, whalers, pearl-divers and coral gatherers: of famous ships and great navies—
“the beautiful and bold adventurers!”
that have gone forth to win empire, or bring food and wealth to the gates of England; of their peril by fire and shipwreck and of those who preserve or rescue them, of hovel! ers and constguardsmen, of life-boat crews and watchers in lonely lighthouses; of the art of ship-building and how the distance was bridged between the rude coracle of the savage and the modem racing yacht, battle-ship, and Atlantic liner; of the art of navigation and the triumph, hardly yet complete, of steam-power over canvas; and lastly of those who "go down to the sea in ships,” of Jack himself and his life before the mast, as it is to-day and as it was in press-gang days, in Royal Navy and merchant service. All this will be treated of, not indeed with precise or chronological arrangement, yet in such order as may be necessary for clearness. And I have hopes that as we proceed together you too will begin to feel the romance and charm
Digitized by Goode
THE MAGIC OF ROMANCE.
7
of the sea: of that mysterious waste into which tall ships fade and are lost for months, and from which brown ship men emerge for a while with rings in their ears and marvellous fables in their mouths; where the legends of Sindbad and Crusoe, of Peter Wilkins and Captain Falconer are more than fiction, and the histories of Cook and Dampier something more than fact; where the Acapulco galleon lumbers timidly along with its hold full of treasure, and Vanderdecken, tacking about the Cape, stands high on his painted poop and shakes a fist at the flying moon ; where the wind blows salt through the ^SaWo with whiffs of tarry hemp and pine, or heavy with the perfume of the spice islands, or wild with spindrift and stinging hail. The magic of this romance, once caught, shall transmute the mud and ooze of such ports as Hull and Bristol to fine gold, and the dirtiest tramp of a schooner to a thing of beauty. You shall lounge by the waterside and catch a glimpse of the coloured horn chart that set Amyas Leigh a-longing; the very names of the vessels—barque, frigate, galliot, chasse-marec and brigantine—shall be music in your ears, and music too the chanty-song, the pilot’s shouting, the clack of the shipwright’s mallet, the creaking of pulley and rope; for in each and all of these you shall catch a whisper of the main.
We have signed articles, then, to sail together and learn what we may about the Sea, Our boat, a 4-ton cutter (she will serve for the first stage of our voyage) lies out at her moorings yonder amid a small cluster of shipping, her mainsail flapping wildly as she swings round to the tide which has just begun to ebb. Our chests and canvas kit-bags have been carried aboard, where they choke, for the present, all entrance to the tiny cabin and almost fill the cockpit. And the waterman who stowed them there is putting off in his dinghy to fetch us, too, aboard.
“ From what harbour are we starting ? ” Never mind its name. It was a harbour of importance once in the days of the Armada; and earlier yet, when “fair stood the wind for France" and
“ putting to the main, At Caux, the mouth of Seine, With ail his martial train
Landed King Harry ’'
—it had close on fifty ships to aid him in England’s first attempt to win an empire beyond her own borders. But to-day the place is of little importance and I have chosen it partly because Luck waits on small beginnings (she hud a better liking for the three little ships with which Columbus put out from Palos on Friday, the 3rd of August, 1492, than for the Great Syracusan Expedition or the Invincible Armada) partly because here you may in small compass find illustrations for the talk we must have in the few minutes left to us, here in this bow window that bulges over the tide. We arc bound on a pilgrimage to the most famous ship upon the waters—Nelson’s Victory.
Digitized by
Google
CHAPTER I.
SAILING VESSELS AND THEIR RIGS.
Tho Rudiments of Sailing—Running—Close-hauled—Fielding’s Voyage—Tacking—Wearing—The Bem-hridge Pilot-Cutter—Points of the Wind—Rig—The Cutter—Pilot-Cutters—Pilots and their Responsibilities—The Romney Frigate—The Yawl, Dandy, and Ketch—The Brig, Brigantine, and Schooner—Square and Forc-and-Aft Sails—The Billy-Boy—The Three-Masted Schooner, Barque, and Barquentine—The Full-Rigged Ship—Four-Masted Ships—Dictionaries—A White Lion—Masts and Spars—Rigging—Going Aloft.
“ TA RAT this ’ere captain," exclaimed an indignant Wiltshire farmer in mid-J—' Atlantic, as he gazed over the bulwarks of a tall Cunarder, “ ’E don’t know 'is business ' Why don’t he keep in the furrows ? ” This, more or less, is the question which we propose to answer in our first chapter.
Down among the many vessels, that arc already beginning to swing round with the first of the ebb, comes a very small boy in a very small row-boat He has lashed a boat-hook to the thwart and hitched his short jacket thereover: one sleeve, held wide in his left hand, forms the sheet of this extemporised sail, and a paddle wriggled in the notch of the stern-board serves him for rudder. Wind and tide are with him, and he drives past anchored yacht and steamer, trading-cutter and coasting-brig, while he takes his lordly ease in the sternsheets, a " young light-hearted master of the wave.”
In this small boy with his appliances you behold the First Navigator—that bold adventurer whose heart, according to Horace, must have been cased in oak and triple brass. Study the diagram of a Homeric boat, if you are unconvinced, and mark the likeness both in steering and sailing apparatus. Odysseus could sail a little closer to the wind, but a very little. With the wind right abeam or just a point ahead he must have hauled his canvas down and taken to his oars.
But let us descend to rudiments. A ship—we are talking just now of sailingships only—is propelled by the wind. But the wind may be blowing from any
Digitized by LnOOQle
“ RUDIMENTS.”
9
quarter and at any angle to the ship’s course, and each of these directions has a name of its own. When, as in the case of our small boy, the ship has the wind right aft and is moving in exactly the same direction as the wind, she is *' running.”
When sailing as nearly in the teeth of the wind as she can possibly manage.
“ 1 VBBT SMALL HOT IN A VKKT SMALL HOW-BOAT ” (P- 8).
she is said to be “ close-hauled ”—the sheets being hauled well in and the sails flattened—or ” on a wind,” or “ sailing close to the wind.” But no matter from what direction the wind be blowing, as long as it allows the ship to steer her course it is a “ fair wind.” Anything beyond this is a ” head wind,” and when the wind is coming steadily ahead the ship can only reach her destination by making a series of zig-zags or “ tacks,” by each tack getting the wind
Digitized by
Google
10 THE STORY OF THE SEA,
sufficiently aslant to drive her forward. Suppose that a vessel at Dover wishes to get down Channel and that the wind is blowing W.S.W. or directly up Channel It is clear that by attempting to sail straight down she will only be blown backwards. Her only course therefore is to slant across for the French coast, and then back from the French coast to the English, and so on, until by means of these diagonals she finally clears the Channel. This making of tacks or boards is called “ beating to windward,” and with anything like a strong head wind progress is, of course, very slow. Indeed, in that ease, our captain would probably prefer to anchor in the Downs and wait until the wind shifted: and a century back, when steamships were not invented and everybody must depend on wind, it was no uncommon thing to see between four and five hundred sail of outward-bound ships anchored off Deal for weeks, waiting for an easterly breeze. When Henry Fielding, the dying novelist, sailed in the Lisbon Packet in 1754, he kept a Journal—a book, by the way, that every English boy should read, not only for its pictures of life on a passenger ship in the last century, but for the manly courage that guided the sick man’s pen in every circumstance of discomfort and annoyance—and from this Journal we get these records of his progress. He left his house on Wednesday, June 26th; reached Rotherhithe in a ■ couple of hours; and wont on board at once, expecting to sail next morning. In this he was mistaken. Not till the Sunday did she drop down to Gravesend. On Monday she got as far as the Nore and brought up. On Tuesday they set sail again and came to anchor off Deal: weighed anchor on Thursday, July 4th, and after proceeding a little distance, were driven back. Tliey weighed again on the 6th, and took from that to the 11th to reach Ryde. On the 22nd they reached St. Helen’s, and on the 25th, Torbay; where again they anchored, leaving on August 1st. Two days afterwards the captain announced that Ushant was cleared and bore some leagues northward. So that it took just a month and a week, from the date of leaving home, to clear the Channel. “The voyage to New Zealand,” observes Mr. Clark Russell, “is now performed in two days less,” With a fair wind, even the Lisbon Packet might have reached Ushant in three days or thereabouts.
To return to “ tacking.” A ship is on the starboard tack, when her starboard (or right hand) side is her weather side—i.e., when the wind is blowing against it; and on the port tack when her port (or left hand) side is her weather side. To shift from one tack to another is called “going about”: and there are two ways of going about (1) by "tacking,” (2) by " wearing.”
1.	Tacking.—This is by far the commoner method of going about. Suppose that a ship is sailing on tho starboard tack and the helmsman wishes to shift her to the opposite, or port, tack. He will put his helm hard “ down ”—i.e., to leeward, which in this case is tho port side—and by this action turn the head of the ship towards the direction in which the wind is blowing. For a moment or two she shakes with her nose pointed dead at the wind and then comes
Digitized by Goode
THE AMI IT.
11
round; the sails draw on the port side, and she is off' on the port tack. At the moment when she is shaking with her nose against the wind she is said to be “ in stays.” And if when she is luffed up (another term for putting the helm down to leeward) she refuses to face up into the wind and drops back on her original tack, she has “ missed stays.” And this may be a serious matter. We will suppose the ship to have been kept on one tack till she is close to the shore. If, when she is luffed up, she has not way enough to carry her round, but falls back on her old tack, she runs straight ashore and is wrecked. Or she may meet with another misfortune (especially if she be a square-rigged vessel): she may come round just far enough to point her nose against the wind and there stick in stays with her bowsprit pointing like the arrow of a weather-cock and her sails shaking but not filling on one side or the other. In this dismal position she is said to be " in irons,” and may drift stern-foremost on the shore.
Certain rigs are much quicker and handier than others in tacking. In the cutter, for instance, one has only to let go the jib-sheet and fore-sheet on one side, and haul them in on the other: the wind does all the rest of the work. In an ordinary lugger, on the other hand, the sail must be lowered at each tack and hoisted again on the other side of the mast. The story of James Wallis and the Bembridge pilot-boat will serve as a very pretty illustration of this difference.
Early in January, 1800—when we were at war with France—a pilot-cutter, the Amitij, of Bembridge in the Isle of Wight, was cruising between the eastend of the island and the Owens, on the look-out for ships. The weather was dull, with a good deal of haze and a light wind blowing up from the southeast. The crew of the Amity consisted of the master, one hand, and a boy named James Wallis, all of Bembridge.
Suddenly they made out a good-sized lugger, or chasse-marfa, looming through the fog. Beyond a doubt she was a French privateer, of the sort that then infested the Channel to snap up our merchantmen and coasters.
The master of the Amity, seeing little or no hope of escape, determined to leave the cutter to her fate and jumping into the small boat that was towing astern, to row for shore. The boat was hauled alongside: in jumped the two men and called to the boy to jump in too. The boy refused. He was going (he said) to stick by the cutter: but he would think it a favour if they would take charge of his watch and the few shillings he had in his pocket, and give them to his father.
They tried hard to persuade him, but without effect. The lugger was now quite close, and no time to lose: so they cast off the painter and rowed away for their lives. It seemed that they were none too soon. The little boat had hardly got clear of the Amity when “ ]nounseer ” ran up under her lee quarter, and prepared to board her. But he counted his chickens a little too soon. Just as he got out his grappling-iron to throw on board, the
Digitized by LnOOQle
12
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
boy rammed the cutter’s helm hard down, luffed her up into the wind, and went about
Now the privateer had lowered his fore-sail as he came alongside, and it took him half-a-minute to set it again. In this half-a-minute the boy had got four or five lengths away.
Off started the lugger in pursuit again, the Frenchmen sending a ball from their swivel-gun and several musket-shots after their quarry. But they were not good marksmen.
As soon as he found the lugger close upon him, the boy went about again.
Again the Frenchman must lower and re-hoist sail, thus losing another half minute. Aboard the cutter, young Wallis had only to let go his weather fore and jib sheets, and haul in and belay his lee sheets. His mainsail swung over of itself.
Sixteen or seventeen times he tacked—the distance between pursuer and pursued being seldom more than forty yards: and gained a little by every board. The Frenchman peppered away, but could neither hit the boy at the helm nor do any serious damage to the cutter’s sails or hull They kept up the chase for over two hours, and then, finding that he had gained about 200 yards and was still gaining, the privateer fired off a volley of musketry and bad language, and bore away.
Before night the boy had brought the cutter safely to anchor at Sea View, a few miles north of Bembridge.
2.	Wearing.—To " wear ” a ship you put the helm up (i.e., to windward) instead of down, and thus bring the ship round with her stern to the wind instead of her head (as in tacking} Though in certain cases this may well be the more advisable plan, there are many reasons why as a rule it should not be so. Among them is this very obvious one, that the chief force of the wind end of the mainsail furthest from the mast, and therefore the violence with which this sail "jybes” or comes over (if your vessel be a cutter or any fore-and-aft rigged vessel) is terrific and may chance to snap the mast off short with the strain.
Lastly, while we are on the subject, let us understand the meaning of such expressions as “a beam wind,” “a point nearer the wind,” “ within four points of the wind,” etc. The compass, as everyone knows, has thirty-two points. And just as our compass is divided, so we may divide the whole horizon round our ship. Now let us draw an imaginary line along our ship’s deck from her rudder to her bowsprit, and obviously we shall have sixteen of these thirty-two points on the starboard hand and sixteen on the port. Consequently from right aft to right abeam will be eight points, and from right ahead will be eight points. And four points will
is applied to the
riirht abeam to
be mid-way between right abeam and right ahead—and there are smart
Digitized by
Google
VARIETIES OF RIG.
13
fore-and-aft rigged craft (some racing cutters, for instance, and fore-and-aft schooners) that will sail even with the wind so far ahead as this. Square-rigged vessels cannot sail so close: their strength lies in “ running": but a clever one will often manage to sail within six points of the wind.
This leads us on to the subject of rig. The varieties of rig, and the different names borne by vessels in consequence, are almost countless. They are all the result of careful experiments in sailing, and it would be well worth while to study them thoroughly and find out why certain rigs are preferred in certain trades or why the use of others is confined to certain parts of the world and even to certain localities on our coast: how (for instance) a Deal lugger differs from a Penzance lugger, and why Deal has adopted one form and Penzance the other ; or how the “ brig ” differs from the “ snow,” the “ snow ” from the “hermaphrodite brig,” and the “hermaphrodite” from a “brigantine.” But in the harbour before us lie specimens of the chief varieties, and we may master these at once.
The two first points to note in determining the rig of any vessel are (1) the number of her masts, and (2) whether her sails are square (i.e., set on “yards” or horizontal spars across her masts) or fore-and-aft. Vessels may have one, two or three masts, and in these days even four or five. Three, however, is the greatest number that need concern us. And if wo count fishingsmacks and pilot-boats, in fact, all shipping down to the smallest craft afloat, it is probable that by far the greater number have only one mast.
Let us begin with our own boat, the little cutter that lies ready to take us on our voyage. You see that she has one mast only, and is rigged fore-and-aft, her largest sail (or mainsail) being run on to the mast with hoops, and its head and foot attached to two spars, the upper and smaller of which is called a “ gaff,” the lower and heavier a “ boom.” She has three other sails besides her mainsail—a " topsail,” and two three-cornered sails that are set in front of the mast: of these two the one ahead which reaches to the end of the bowsprit is a “jib,” and the one behind it a “foresail.” You may notice several examples of this rig in the harbour at this moment, from the pilot-boat just putting out yonder to meet an inward-bound vessel, to the racing yacht that lies here at anchor with her copper fore-foot gleaming as the tide breaks about it in ripples, and her triangular club-flag, or “ burgee,” flickering at the masthead. The cutter yacht is the queen of racing vessels, and though other rigs, such as the yawl or schooner, may be chosen for comfort or because their sails can be worked by fewer hands, there is none that can deprive her of the palm for speed. When she hoists her big mainsail the landsman’s eye may find it difficult to identify her rig with that of our little boat: and for occasion she has extra
sails that we do not possess, such as the “spinnaker.” This beautiful sail hoists out on a boom when racing with a light or moderate breeze astern: shall you see in this world a more enchanting sight than when three or
she nor four
Digitized by Google
14
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
racing yachts come close-hauled round the mark-boat and suddenly shake out their big butterfly wings, like told upon fold of white gossamer, to catch every breath of the following wind.
The pilot cutter carries on her mainsail the initial letter of the port she hails from (S if it be Southampton, P if Plymouth, and so on), with her number beneath She flies also a red and white flag. So that a captain coining up Channel, if he sights one of these boats, knows in. an instant what her business is and if she belongs to the port into which he wishes to be taken.
These pilots have special knowledge of certain channels, harbours and rivers
A PILOT CUTTER,
along the coast, have passed special examinations, and are officially authorised to navigate vessels in these waters. And in order to prevent the loss of life and shipping that would inevitably occur if masters of vessels steered their ships in dangerous waters with which they were improperly acquainted, the law orders that every homeward-bound vessel as she nears the coast and gets into “ pilot’s waters ” (as the phrase is) must take a pilot on board to bring her into port; and further, that immediately the pilot steps on board the entire responsibility for the vessel’s navi-
captain is still accountable for questions of navigation he must the pilot, for instance, says, “ You
gation lies on his shoulders. The the management of the ship, but on all listen and do what the pilot tells him. If must have some more canvas on her,” the
captain must order more sail to be spread: or if he decides that the tide in a
certain channel is too low for safety and that she must bring up and wait, the captain gives orders for letting go the anchor. Of course he may demur to any order that strikes him as patently unwise or dangerous: but even then he does so on his own grave responsibility.
The story of the Romney frigate affords a good illustration of the extent of a pilot’s authority and liability. The Romney, a frigate of 50 guns, Captain the Hon. John Colville, sailed from Yarmouth on Sunday, November 18th, 1804, under orders to join Rear-Admiral Russell off the Texel. She carried two North Sea pilots. On the following day she was nearing the Dutch coast. The weather was thick; but the pilots, nevertheless, judging that they were as yet a considerable distance from the land, proposed to stand in closer under doublereefed topsails and fore top-mast stay-sail. Captain Colville considered this
Digitized by
Google
THE R031NEY.
15
unwise, and would have preferred to wait until the weather cleared up a little before standing in closer. However, the pilots were in charge and so he gave way against his judgment.
Very soon they sighted through the haze a large ship, bearing east by north. They stood towards her to find out who she was and made her out to be a large American merchant ship—ayrownd. This very naturally frightened the pilots and they at once tried to put the ship about and run off on the port tack. But it was too late. In a few minutes she struck heavily on the Haaks Sands.
A heavy sea was breaking on the sands, and the wind getting up into a stiff breeze from the south-west. On sounding the well the carpenters found that the frigate was taking water so fast that had she room to sink she must have gone down at once. The pilots, still ignorant of their position, assured Captain Colville that the ship would be high and dry at low water: so, after striking top-gallant and'top-masts, he made preparations for shoring her up as soon as the tide left her. Meanwhile he fired minute guns in the hope of attracting the attention of some of the British men-of-war cruising about the Texel: and set his crew to work to rig up rafts, on which to get ashore if the frigate broke up.
By this time it was blowing a gale. The masts were cut away to case the frigate, but her condition was hopele.ss. Every sea, as the tide rose, made a clean breach over her: the gale showed no tendency to abate: and darkness was coming down fast. Soon the whole ship was under water, except the quarter-deck, upon which the whole crew gathered in a close-packed crowd.
During the night the frigate parted amidships.
At daybreak some of the crew managed to get ashore on the rafts; and about noon seven boats reached the wreck, and a Dutch officer in command told Captain Colville that he and his men should be landed in safety on condition that they would surrender themselves as prisoners of war. Captain Colville had no choice. He surrendered: was safely landed, and made prisoner with all his ship’s company: and after being kindly treated by the Dutch, was exchanged and returned to England.
On December 31st he and his officers were tried by court-martial at Sheerness for the loss of the frigate. The court, finding that she had been cast ashore through the ignorance of her pilots, and that Captain Colville had omitted nothing of his duty, fully acquitted him of blamo. The pilots, however, were deprived of their pay, declared incapable henceforward of taking charge of any of His Majesty’s ships or vessels of war, and imprisoned in the Marshalsea, one for twelve, and the other for six months.
A pilot is therefore a person of very considerable importance: and it must be allowed that, as a class, the pilots around our coasts arc alive to their responsibilities and do their work well. They are paid according to the draught of the vessel they take in hand, and thus the amount of their earnings is to
Digitized by LnOOQle
—J
i
EVERY SEA . . . MADE A CLEAN BREACH OVER HER” (p. l.'A
Digitized by
Google
PILOTS.
17
some extent a matter of luck For suppose half a dozen pilots to be on the look-out here, on the heights above the harbour. They have tossed up—that is the rule—to settle the order in which they are to go out. Tom is to have the first ship, Dick the second, and Harry the third. Tom’s ship when sighted
may turn out to be a miserable schooner of 150 tons or so, while and Harry get windfalls in two fine Scotia barques of something like
little Dick Nova 1,500
tons apiece.
We have discussion of
JUCDtfi CVTTKB.
»AN»T.
strayed, however, from our rigs and must return to it. The cutter, as we have seen,
is a one-masted vessel make the transition to masts in the Yawl and Dandy, and may see example of each from
We two the an our
window. The Yawl yonder is a pleasure-yacht: the Dandy a hard - working fishing-vessel “ How can I tell she is a fishing-boat at this distance?” Among
other signs, by the letters on her bows. You remember a pilot-boat carries its number and the initial letter of its port upon its mainsail: a fishing-boat carries its number and two letters of the name of its port—usually the first and last Thus a boat with W.Y, 57 on her bow will come from Whitby, and a boat
with P.H. 18 from Plymouth, and so on. Yawl and the Dandy, have very different walks in. life, their rigs are very nearly the same, and is just that of a cutter with a small mizzen-mast aft to carry a small sail
In the Ketch — a common form of trading-vessel—this small mizzen has grown, and we find ourselves among vessels unmistakably two-masted, of which the most important are the Brig, the Brigantine, ■ and the Schooner.
Well, though these two, the
BM
A Brig is a two-masted vessel, square-
rigged on both masts—ia, with yards and square-sail' on both fore-mast and main-mast.
A Brigantine has her fore-mast square-rigged like a brig's; but her mainmast is fore-and-aft rigged, just like the mast of a cutter.
2
Digitized by LnOOQle
18
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
Of Schooners and-aft schooner
1. A fore-and-and no “tops” fore-mast and cutter’s mast. In that of the cutter, she has cross -
sembles a
■OHSSt WLt
there are two kinds, the fore-and the top-sail schooner.
aft schooner has no yards to either mast; but both her main-mast are rigged like a fact, her rig is practically doubled. Instead of tops trees. A schooner yacht is always fore - and - aft rigged, whereas most trading schooners are top-sail rigged.
2. A top-sail schooner re-fore-and-after, with this differ-
ence, that sho carries two square-sails on her fore-mast—a fore top sail and a fore top-gallant sail; but these sails are smaller than a brig’s, and have lighter yards to carry them. Her main-mast is rigged like
a cutter’s mast.
Schooners are about the handiest of all vessels—by which I mean that for their size they can be worked with least effort and the smallest crew. Take, for instance, the Prince of Wales’s racing cutter Britannia, of 154 tons rating, and compare her with a schooner yacht of the same tonnage. The Britannia carries a crew of thirty men and more, and her main-sail alone is so big that fifteen of these will not be too many to set it, nor twenty to haul in her boom in a stiff wind. Now a schooner would spread almost as much canvas alto-
gether; but her sails are smaller and easier to manage. In the same way a trading-schooner will take fewer hands than a trading-brig of the same size. When a schooner goes about, her sails require little management, but come over automatically almost; but the square-sails of a brig have to be brought
round by letting go braces and hauling weather braces; and she has many sails
lee
in if
set
this is a long job. Sailors will tell you there is all the difference in the world between sailing a brig and sailing a schooner, and that the same man is seldom good
rout s^rr
501 OOMS
BIhY BOV
SlOOp
Digitized by LnOOQle
SCHOONERS.
19
at both. If accustomed to sail a schooner, he will not allow time for the brig’s slower evolutions. “ It's the rottenest kind of rig,” says Captain Wicks in Mr. Stevenson’s “ The Wrecker," as he surveys the brig Flying Scud ; “ all blooming pocket-handkerchiefs!" Now Captain Wicks was a fore-and-aft sailor, and, as the author tells us, “could take a schooner through a Scotch reel, felt her mouth and divined her temper like a rider with a horse; she on her side recognising her master and following his wishes like a dog.” But as readers of the story will remember, when Captain Wicks turned his hand to steering a brig, he was too hasty with her and ran her aground.
Further, it must be remembered that a schooner will sail nearer the wind, and that all reefing and furling of sails is heavy work on a square-rigged vessel, where the men have to go aloft and lie out upon the yards; and we shall understand why it is that brigs are decreasing in numbers, though you may still find many afloat. The old collier-brigs that used to tramp the North Sea between Tyne and Thames have been almost entirely driven out by steamers; the gun-brigs of the Navy have long been obsolete; and altogether it is to be feared that this beautiful rig will have perished long before the final triumph of steam over sails.
Lastly among two-masted vessels may be mentioned the Galliot or BiUy-boy. This form of vessel is common in Holland and not rare along the north-east
coast of England, and its individuality lies rather in its hull than in its rig. Indeed a billy-boy may be sloop-rigged, or schooner-rigged, or ketch-rigged, or (for aught I know) lugger-rigged. But in any case she will have a very bluff bow with a standing bowsprit, and a round stern with windows in it. This is as picturesque a vessel as any afloat, with a good-humoured lumbering air about her: and is what sailors call “ a good sea-boat,” which means that she behaves well in rough weather and rides easy in the heaviest seas. Only she wants plenty if sea-room for her manoeuvres, and is not at all the sort of craft to turn round in her own length.
We now come to three-masted vessels, and among these roust consider the three-masted schooner, the barque, the barquentine, and the full-rigged ship.
The Three-masted Schooner, which chiefly haunts the western ports of England—Cardiff, Swansea, Bristol, and Plymouth, is just like a two-master, except that abaft of her main-mast she carries a mizzen, rigged just like the Tnain-mast. She also has this peculiarity among three-masted ships that her fore-mast (which carries the square sails) is higher than her main-mast and her roam-mast than her mizzen. In ships, barques, and barquentines the mainmast is usually the highest, then the fore-mast, and the mizzen lowest of all.
Digitized byTooele
20
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
A Barque is just a brig plus a mizzen of different rig. Her fore-mast and main-mast are square-rigged like a brig’s; but her mizzen is fore-and-aft rigged.
A Barquentine is square-rigged Eke a brig on her fore-mast only; but has fore-and-aft sails on her main and mizzen-masts.
A Ship, according to Act of Parliament, is "any fabric that is not propelled by oars.” This is how the law defines it, but any sailor will tell you that in this matter, as Mr. Bumble once remarked, “the law is a bass.” A full-rigged ship, as properly defined, is a three-masted vessel, square-rigged on each mast. I say a “ three-masted ” vessel, though as a
matter of fact there- are many four-masted ships afloat, and H.M.S. Minotaur (to take but one instance from the Royal Navy) has five masts. But curiously enough a ship is the only vessel to which the addition of a mast or two makes no difference. Take a brig and give her a third square-rigged mast and (as you may see by comparing the illustrations given) she becomes a ship. Take a ship and add as many masts as you please and she remains a ship, even if your new mast be a spanker mast—that is, fore-and-aft rigged like the mizzen-mast of a barque. These large four-masters have their critics; but there are many reasons for their growing popularity. To begin with, they are undoubtedly fast sailers, making when close-hauled as many as ten knots an hour, and as many as sixteen when running free. They are also said to be very handy in stays. And further, ship-owners find that on the whole one big ship is more economical than two small ones. It needs fewer hands, and one captain and set of officers do instead of two.
Of course these are only a few of the rigs. We shall be well within the mark if we say that there are hundreds of others, and the differences between many of these are so minute that, as an ancient mariner once assured me, " to know ’em all you’d have to go and get born at sea, and even then you wouldn’t get half the seamen afloat to agree with you.” You will find the dictionaries quite hopeless
on nautical matters. I take down a most popular etymological dictionary, and find “ Brigantine ” defined as “ a small light vessel or brig.” The man might just as well have said “ a small brigand,” or defined a sardine as “ a
Digitized by
Google
“A PRETTY STORY."
21
small sard.” According to the same authority a yawl still bears only its old meaning of “a small ship’s boat with four or six oars.” Dr. Johnson is worse. Here are one or two of his definitions:—“Keel, the bottom of a ship,” which is much the same as to say " Chimney, the top of a house.” "Tiller, the rudder of a boat,”—one might just as well assert that a bell-rope is a bell “ Shrouds, the sail ropes,”—whereas, of course, shrouds have no connection at all with sails. In fact the great lexicographer’s notion of a ship would seem to have been pretty much like a certain sign-painter’s, of
A forb mart.
B Font TO PM A FT.	-
C FOSE TOPGALLANT KANT.
D FOBt BOY AL MAST.
K MAIN MART, P MACS TOP MATT. G NACK TOPGALLANT MAST.
1	MIZZEN HAST. J KUUX TOPMART. K MIZZEN TOPGALLANT mart. L MIZZEN MOYAL Mart.
M FORE YARD.
X FORE TOPSAIL Yard. 0 FORI TOPGALLANT YARD. P FOIE ROYAL YARD. Q Main yard.
B MAIN TOPSAIL YARD.
8	MAIN topgallant yard. T MAIS ROYAL YARD.
L’ CROW JACK YARD. V MIZZEN TOPSAIL YARD. W MIZZEN TOPGALLANT
TARD, X MIZZEN ROYAL
yard. Y BowufTtrr. E jib-boom, .t GAFF.
1.	YR I BOW,
1	THE WAWT.
1 THZ QUARTER.
C TRE STERN.
5.	THE CHAINS.
6.	THE FORE TOP.
7.	THE MAIN TOP.
8.	THZ MIZZEN TOP.
9.	THE FORE TOPMAST CROMTREEB.
10.	THE MAIN TOPMAST LHDSHTREES.
11.	THE MIZZEN TOPMAST CROSSTREES.
12.	THE MIZZEN PEAK.
« THE SHROUDS.
b FORk STAY.
« FORE TOPMAST STAY.
J FORE TOPOALLANT
STAY.
C FORE ROYAL STAY.
9 FORB TOPSAIL LITTS.
A TORI TOPSAIL BRACES.
i FORE TOPGALLANT
LIFTS.
j FORE TOPGALLANT
BRACER.
A’ MAIN 8TAY.
I MAIN TOFMAXT STAT.
STAT.
I MAIN ROYAL STAY. J MAIN TOPSAIL LIFTS.
7 MAIN TOPGALLANT
LIFTS.
BRACE.
♦ MIZZEK STAY.
I MlZZFN TOPMAST STAY. It MIZZEN TOPGALLANT STAY.
V MIZZEN ROYAL STAY.
13.	THE FORE TRUCK.
14.	THE MAIN TRUCK.
15.	THE MIZZEN TRUCK.
1^. THE SPANKER BOOM.
DUO RAM OP A SHIP.
Showing the Satara and some of the Principal Ropu.
whom Dean Hole tells a pretty story, It was rumoured in a certain neighbourhood that a white lion was the only picture this artist could paint, and that a sailor who had returned home with a little money in his pocket, and wished to open a public house, went to consult him about a sign. The painter, after hinting that he was master of all subjects, went on to suggest, as a friend, that there was no sign in the world which in his experience so fascinated the public and made people yearn so anxiously to quench their thirst, as a white lion, fo this the sailor replied that, although he had visited many countries, he had never yet made the acquaintance of this animal, and did not particularly wish to. He preferred a ship. The artist assured him that although a ship was a respectable and even a beautiful object on the sea, it had no power of allurement on land, and would in fact be generally avoided. If his friend wished to
Digitized by
Google
22
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
succeed, he must stifle his own sentiments and consult those of his customers: and they loved nothing so well as a white lion. The sailor was not convinced. He used violent expressions about the white lion, and even went so far as to affirm, as Mrs. Prig affirmed of Mrs. Harris, that he “didn’t believe there was no such person; ” and wound up by wishing that all manner of dreadful things might befall him if he hoisted that humbugging beast over his front door. Tho poor artist had to give way. “ You’re a very obstinate man,” said he, "and you’ll be sorry for it. Of course you can have a ship if nothing else will suit you, and I shall paint you a ship; but, mark my words—It’ll be more like a white lion.”
On the previous page is a faithful diagram, of a full-rigged ship, with her principal ropes and spars; and it should be compared with the illustration on p. 20, of a similar vessel under sail. A few necessary notes upon it may conclude our study of shipping for the present.
1.	Masts and spars.—Though we speak of a ship as having three masts— the fore, main, and mizzen—each of these are divided into several distinct pieces, for the very sufficient reason (among others) that trees do not grow tall enough to make the masts all in one. The rnain-mast of a man-of-war from truck to foot will very possibly measure 170 feet: and even were it possible to find timber of this length, it would be more convenient to have the masts in different pieces. In dirty weather, for instance, the captain of a man-of-war will “ strike,” or lower, his top-gallant-masts to ease the ship; and supposing any part of the mast to be injured in a gale, the damage may be repaired by removing the injured piece and fitting up a sound one, instead of necessitating a complete new mast.
These pieces then have the following names:—
1.	Nearest th? deck. Fore-mast. Main-mast. Mizzen-mast.
2.	Next above. Fore top-mast. Main top-mast. Mizzen top-mast.
3.	„ „ Fore top-guliant-mast. Stain top-gallant-mast. Mizzen top-gall ant-mast
4.	Highest. Fore royal-mast. Main royal-mast. Mizzen royal-mast.
In some ships the top-gallant-mast and the royal-mast will be in one piece, the lower part of which will be called the top-gallant, and the upper the royal. In others, the royal-mast is separate and is then called a "Added”* royal-mast.
The yards, or big spars that go across the masts and carry the square sails, are named after the masts. Thus we get the fore-yard, the fore topsail-yard, the fore top-gallant-yard and the fore royal-yard, and so on with the other masts, except that the lowest yard on the mizzen is not called the mizzen-yard but the cross-jack (pronounced “crojjik”) yard.
* A fid in a bar passing- through a hole and supporting an upper mash A lidded royal or top-gal bi nt mast, therefore, is a mast erected above a lower mast against which its foot is supported by the fid.
Digitized by GOOQle
RIGGING.
23
2.	Rigging.—k\\ rigging is either standing or running rigging. The standing rigging comprises all ropes that are fixed; the running rigging all those that move through blocks or pulleys, and are hauled in or let go in working the sails, etc. The standing rigging is always tarred; the running rigging never. And the former will often consist of wire rope, while hemp and inanilla will be used for the running gear. But iron is being used more and more every year, and now in many ships portions of the running rigging are made of chain instead of rope.
Some important parts of the standing rigging are :—
The stays.—These are ropes which hold the mast firm in its place against the action of the wind. They are run from the top of the mast to the deck, as the back-stays; or to the foot of another mast, as the main top-mast stay, which runs from the head of the main top-mast to the foot of the fore topmast, or the fore top-mast stay, which runs from the fore top to the bowsprit end. The three-cornered sails which set on these stays are called stay-sails ; and thus we have the fore stay-sail, the fore top-mast stay-sail, the fore topgallant stay-sail, and so on with the other masts.
The shrouds are ropes supporting the mast on either side, as the stays and back-stays support it fore and aft. These shrouds run from the dead-eyes to the tops, and from the tops to the cross-trees; and have small ropes called ratlines run across them, these forming rope ladders by which the sailors go aloft. This business of going aloft will continue to daunt the beginner until the day when steam shall have entirely swept sailing-ships off the face of our planet We will follow the progress of such a youngster. At the order to jump aloft (let us suppose it is to take a reef in the mizzen top-sail) he swings himself into the weather rigging (for on the lee aide the lean of the vessel would tilt him out backwards over the water) and climbs up the ratlines comfortably enough till he reaches the mizzen-top. Now the top is a flat wooden platform and very convenient to stand upon; but the question just at present is, How is he to clamber over the edge and get on to it ?—for it overhangs him wide. There are two ways: The first is the “ lubber’s hole,” an opening in the top through which he may crawl, if he doesn’t mind the inference that he is but a poor seaman; the other method is to get into the Mfuttockshrouds,” bars of iron stretching out at a sharp angle from the mast to the rim of the platform;
climb out on these with his back downwards, like a fly walking on the ceiling, and swing himself up and over the edge. One can hardly wonder that many a boy has been obliged to give up the sea after his first voyage, simply because he could not conquer the giddiness that laid hold of him as he mounted on the
Digitized by
Google
24
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
ratlines; and there is no doubt that a brutal or thoughtless officer may inflict exquisite torture by a rough attempt to cure this purely physical infirmity. Mr. Clark Russell has given us an instance which came under his own observation.* The victim was a lad of thirteen, who had been shipped in an Australian port "He was ordered on to the fore-royal yard along with another youngster. It was his first journey up the masts, and when he was half-way up the shrouds he came to a dead stop. The boatswain sung out to him to * look alive and go on. The poor little chap, with shaking hands and a face like the foam alongside, footed it as high as the futtock-shrouds, where he halted, looking up at the overhanging platform of the top. ' Over you go ’' shouted the boatswain from the forecastle. * I can’t, sir; indeed I can’t, sir! * cried the little fellow piteously. ‘ We’ll see about that,’ said the boatswain, and called to an ordinary seaman to help him up. This youth was a brute, and when he reached the clinging boy he began to pinch him in the legs, and pulled out his sheath-knife and threatened to stab him if he did not go over the top. It was a big top, the angle of the mast—the wind being abaft the beam—was a small one, and the futtock-shrouds stretched away from the boy like the ribs of an open umbrella from the stick. The miserable little fellow, terrified by the sight of the knife behind him, laid hold of the long irons and made a swing with his legs at the ratlines, missed them, vibrated a moment or two like a pendulum, and then dropped past the outstretched hand of the sailor below him like a flash, striking the shrouds, and rebounding as a ball might overboard. He was drowned, of course.”
So much for the standing rigging. Among the many scores of ropes that go to make up the running rigging we need only take note here that sheets are ropes, which work the sails, halliards those by which the sails are hauled up or forward, while braces are ropes attached to the ends of the yards for the purpose of hauling them round. Every sail in the ship, every rope, every block, every inch of timber almost, has a name of its own; but let us pause here on the outskirts of the sailor’s vocabulary. We shall want a long breath before we make acquaintance with “ cat-heads,” “ dead lights,” "lizards,” “ whelps,” “ sheepshanks,” " Spanish foxes,” “ Flemish horses,” and other fearful wild-fowl inhabiting that luxuriant realm of speech. -
We have now to hoist sail for Portsmouth. A night at sea, unless the wind freshens, and the next night at “ the Nut,” as Marryat’s midshipman used irreverently to call the old sign of the Keppel’s Head : and on the following morning we will be rowed out to Nelson’s Victory. Standing on her upper dock we shall see the spot where he fell, and, looking thence, may see the spot where the people rushed into the water to implore his blessing as he sailed away on September 15th, 1805, upon his last errand—sailed away to win the day at Trafalgar and to receive his death-wound. Standing there, we
• 11 Round the Galley Fire,’’ by W. Clark Russell. London: Chatto & Windus, p. 12.
Digitized by LnOOQle
TO TRAFALGAR.
25
may let our imagination follow the great Admiral as he steers west and south, after a short delay to let his men say their farewells to the crowd in the shore - boats, down Channel, past Ushant, and across the Bay, till we reach that spot where every Briton’s heart should lift, recalling Browning’s lines :—
“Nobly nobly, Cape St. Vincent to the north-west died away ;
Sunset ran, one glorious blood-red, reeking into Cadiz Bay ;
Blushing ’mid the burning water, full in face Trafalgar lay;
In the dimmest north-east distance, dawned Gibraltar grand and grey;
‘ Here and here did England help me : how can I help England ’—say, Whoso turns as I, this evening, turn to God to praise and pray, While Jove’s planet rises yonder, silent over Africa.”
Digitized by LnOOQle
CHAPTER II.
THE OLD MAN-OF-WAR, NELSON’S VICTORY,
Nelson’s Victory—Her Old Age—Her History—Siege of Toulon—Jervis at St. Vincent—Nelson Hoists his Fing—Blockade of Toulon—The Enemy Slips Out—A Long Chase—Nelson at Merton—Hie Departure from Portsmouth—Joins Collingwood—The French and Spaniards in Sight—Before Action— The Famous Signal—Trafalgar—The Death of Nelson—His Burial in St. Paul's.
SHE lies off the Gun Wharf in Portsmouth Harbour. At the first glance one misses the immense masts, heavy shrouds and rigging, stout cables and triple battery of formidable guns, that in the old days made her a vision of solid and towering menace from water-line to mast-head. The monkey-spars she now carries are trivial, almost ludicrous. But as our boat passes under her flashing stern-windows and draws alongside, the sense of disappointment passes. Then we look up and see only her massive timbers soaring above us and diminishing in beautiful perspective, her white streaks broken by the cool shadows of her cavernous ports, the prodigious overhang of chains and cathead. The hull is the hull of Nelson’s Victory, unaltered (save that the modern hand has cut scuttles in the sides for ventilating the cock-pit) and, to all appearance, wonderfully preserved. Appearances in this case are somewhat deceptive: for we hear that she has continually to be patched and painted and doctored in one way and another. Still, the Victory—the hull of her—is very nearly the same ship in which Hood and Jervis and Nelson hoisted their flags.
On October 21st—Trafalgar Day—she will be gaily decorated with flags and garlands of evergreens: for the memory of our great Admiral is as green today as when the sailors in St. Paul’s Cathedral snatched the Union Jack from his coffin and tore it into strips to keep to their deaths and leave to their children On any other day in the year the chances are you will find at the most a reverent half-dozen bound on the same pilgrimage as yourself. As you reach the head of the gangway ladder, a polite marine meets you and leads you to the upper deck and the brass plate inserted there in the planking. You stand bare-headed by this, the spot made sacred by Nelson's blood: and your heart must be dull indeed if it does not echo the emotion of that glorious day, October the twenty-first, 1805. The deck is white; the guns no longer line the bulwarks; only this square of brass suggests the fight that
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE VICTORY.
27
stained the planking crimson, heaped the shelter of the bulwarks with wounded and dead, and covered all with the fog of battle, rent continually by visions of naked gunners caked with sweat and gunpowder, by the quick jets of musketry fire and the brood red flare of the heavy guns. Below, the hands of meddling officials have been busy with the ship. The spot where Nelson breathed his last is now a cabiu; the old cabins have been cleared away and only a few of the guns remain. The Victory is an imperfect relic.
She was launched in 1765, and was one of the largest ships of her day and generation. She was 2,164 tons burden, was rated for 100 guns (she really carried 102), and had a complement of 841 men. She was classed first-rate with such ships as the Royal Sovereign, which flew Collingwood’s flag at Trafalgar, or the Britannia, both of 100 guns, or two only in excess of the famous “fighting Temdraire”—made still more famous by Turner’s great picture —and the Dreadnought, used until a few years back as a Seaman’s Hospital and anchored in the reach of the Thames in front of Green wick The Victory may be taken as a specimen of the old shipwright’s art at its highest point—a ship at once beautiful, seaworthy, swift, and sound. Nelson often complains in his journals of the unseaworthiness of many of his vessels; but this, his last flag-ship, was true *' heart of oak," and stood all tests that the warfare of the elements or of man could bring against her.
The Victory carried Lord Hood’s flag at the famous attack on Toulon, when Sir Sidney Smith with half-a-dozen gunboats destroyed the magazines and shipping in that harbour; at the taking of Bastia; and again at Calvi, where. Nelson lost an eye and helped to gain the day. It was from her quarterdeck that Sir John Jervis directed the splendid action off Cape St Vincent, on St Valentine’s Day, 1797. That day—the day of “Nelson’s bridge”— marks an epoch in our career of conquest: nay, the grim old Admiral must have known very well that England’s existence as a nation depended on him as he spied the grand fleet of Spain looming out of the morning mist, in number twenty-seven sail of the line to his fifteen. He was stumping up and down the quarter-deck as successive reports were brought to him. “There are eighteen sail of the line, Sir John.” “Very well, sir,” “There are twenty sail, Sir John." “Very well, sir.” “Sir John, there are twentyseven sail of the line; nearly double our own." “ Enough, sir ; no more of that, sir; if there are fifty, I’ll go through ’em.” “ That’s right, Sir John,” said Hallowell, his flag-captain; “ and a rare good licking we’ll give them.”
But it is of Nelson and Trafalgar that a man must think as he stands on the quarter-deck of the Victory, Let us write the three glorious names large across our page before we tell the story of the greatest naval battle in our country’s annals.
Nelson. Trafalgar. The Victory.
On the 12th of October, 1801, in consequence of the Treaty of Amiens, peace was proclaimed between Great Britain and France. On the 16th of May, 1803,
Digitized by GOOQle
28
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
LORD NELSON.
(After the Portrait by W’y/iam Betehey, Ji.A.)
King George told his faithful subjects, who had been expecting the announcement for some time, that the treaty had become waste paper; and war broke out again. At once the dockyards and victualling-yards were busy; the press-gangs were out night after night; old ships were fitted out and orders issued for new ones. Lord Nelson was appointed Commander-in-chief of the Mediterranean Fleet, and, on the day after the King’s message to Parliament, hoisted his flag on board his old ship, the Victory, and set sail for Toulon.
Physically, Nelson was a broken man At Calvi he bad lost an eye, at Santa Cruz an arm ; he had been wounded in the head and in the side; he had suffered the rigours of Arctic seas and tropical heats; had been prostrated by dysentery a^ Honduras, and sea-sickness in every quarter of the globe; his frame was worn to a shadow, and he only
hoped to live to fight one more battle. His ships were unseaworthy, "but he could trust his officers and men ; for he was one of those commanders who make good officers and men. When he took command it was expected that
the Mediterranean would be an active scene, if only he could entice the French ships out of the harbour of Toulon, where they lay. " The French fleet," he wrote, “ is in high feather, and as fine as paint can make them; but our weather-beaten ships, I have no fear, will make their sides like a plum pudding.’’ And again, “ We are in the right fighting trim ; let them come on as soon as they please. I never saw a fleet altogether so well officered and manned; would to God the ships were half as good' ”
But the French fleet would not come out and fight. Day after day and week after week Nelson’s temper was tried by the same dull operations off the blockaded port—tacking, wearing, heaving to, making sail, and abusing the French Admiral’s aversion to open battle. This Admiral was M. La Touche Treville and Nelson had a score to settle with him. One day, when RearAdmiral Campbell stood in with the Canopus, Donegal, and Amazon, ‘just to see that all the ducks were safe in pond,” M. La Touche Treville, finding
Digitized by^OOQlC
30
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
that the main body of the British fleet was out of sight, pushed out with five sail of the line and three heavy frigates, and chased them about four leagues, but sheered off and went back as soon as Campbell edged.away towards Lord Nelson. The Frenchman published a boastful account of this, aflirming that he had given chase to the whole British fleet, and that Nelson had fled before him. Nelson was at pains to obtain a copy of this dispatch. “ I keep it,” he said, " and if I take him, by God he shall eat it I ”
M. La Touche Tr4ville, however, managed to escape Nelson’s vengeance by dying. He died, according to the French papers, in consequence of walking up so often to the signal-post upon Sopet to watch the British fleet “I always pronounced that would be his death,” said Nelson. “If he had but come out and fought me, it would at least have added ten years to my life.” The station off Toulon he had grown to call his home; and truly he watched that port with a perseverance that has never been surpassed. From May, 1803, to August, 1805, he set foot outside the Victory but three times; each occasion was the king’s service, and neither time of absence exceeded an hour. The weather, meanwhile, had been so unusually severe that, as he said, the Mediterranean seemed altered. It was his rule never to contend with the gales, but either to run to the southward to escape their violence, or furl all the sails and make the ships as easy as possible. His men, though he said flesh and blood could hardly stand it, continued in excellent health.
So the blockade dragged on until, on the 17th of January, 1805, Admiral Villeneuve (who had succeeded La Touche Trevi Ue) slipped out to sea, relying on the co-operation of the Spaniards. Nelson lay at anchor off the Sardinian coast, when at three o’clock in the afternoon of the 19th, the Active and Seahorse frigates brought him the long-desired intelligence. Up went the signal to unmoor at once, and then to weigh; and at six in the evening the fleet ran through the strait between Biche and Sardinia, a passage so narrow that the ships could only pass one at a time, each following the stern lights of her leader. Never were seamen in higher spirits than these as they stood out to sea in pursuit. For ten days they beat about the Sicilian seas, but no Frenchmen could be spied Theft the fleet raced to snap them off Egypt; but they were not there. Baffled thus, it bore up for Malta, and met intelligence from Naples that the enemy, having been dispersed in a gale, had put back to Toulon. “ These gentlemen," said Nelson, “ are not accustomed to a Gulf of Lyons gale; wc have buffeted them for one-and-twenty months and not carried away a spar.”
On the 27th of February, the British fleet (every ship of which had remained ready for battle, without a bulkhead up, night or day, for five weeks or more), anchored in Bulla road, in the Gulf of Cagliara ; put to sea again as soon as the wind abated; encountered more gales; was driven to anchor again in the Gulf of Palma; and at the end of March beat up once more for its old station off Toulon. It seemed as if the dreary blockade would begin
Digitized by LnOOQle
A WILD GOOSE CHASE.
31
again: but on the 4th of April came the Pkcebe frigate out of a haze of drizzling rain, and ran up the signal that the French Admiral was at sea. 'When last seen he had been steering towards the African coast. Soon further intelligence came that he had passed outside the straits on the 8th, and the British started in chase; but such was the weather that they never got sight of Gibraltar till the 30th, and then only to find a head-wind blowing so strongly that to get out was impossible. " My good fortune, my dear Ball,” wrote Nelson to the Governor of Malta, “seems flown away. I cannot get a fair wind, or even a side-wind—dead foul! dead foul!”
On the 5th of May the wind at last took a turn to the east, and out went the British before it They carried sail night and day, and every rag they could hoist On the 15th they made Madeira, and on the 4th of June reached Barbadoes. Here, for the first time, they had certain news that the combined French and Spanish fleets were in the West Indies. The account ran that they had been seen from St Lucia on the 28th standing to the southward, and that Tobago and Trinidad were their objects. This Nelson doubted, and only yielded to the general opinion with these words: “ If your intelligence proves false, you lose me the French fleet.” Off went the fleet to Tobago only to find the news false. From Tobago they hunted to the Gulf of Paris, to Grenada, to Antigua As fast as Nelson reached one place, his foe was reported in another: but he had reason to believe that his unresting pursuit had prevented them from striking the blow at our West Indian colonies, and that they were now heading for home. So, on June the 13th, the word was given for home. On the 17th of July they' made Cape St Vincent, and on the 19th anchored off Gibraltar, where, says he, “I went on shore for the first time since June the 16th, 1803, and from having my foot out of the Victory two years, wanting ten days.”
Collingwood, who was at Gibraltar, thought that Ireland was the enemy’s object Nelson, mad with chagrin, could only wait two days before putting off again. Up and down the Bay of Biscay he went, and across to the northvest coast of Ireland, and still with no success; then back to Ushant, where he met Cornwallis. The day after this meeting he headed the Victory for Portsmouth, sick at heart Nelson was more shattered than his ships.
At Portsmouth the Victory unloaded, and, no sooner had Nelson struck his flag and stepped ashore, than news came that Sir Robert Calder had fallen in with the French and Spanish fleets off Finisterre, and had captured two ships —a creditable spoil from a superior force; but the public felt that Nelson would never have left his enemy, once found, until they had anchored in Portsmouth or taken him to Brest. Still, here was the fact that Calder had found them, while Nelson had failed.
So Nelson went inland to his house at Merton, and tried to forget his disappointments in harvesting, gardening, fishing, and country pursuits; but at times he must break away from these employments, and then would pace
Digitized by LnOOQle
32
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
round and round the garden walks, talking to himself by the hour on end. Many days had not elapsed before Captain Blackwood, on his way to London with dispatches, knocked at his door early one grey morning. Nelson, who was already dressed, exclaimed the moment he saw him: “I am sure you bring me news of the French and Spanish fleets.” It was so. The French had refitted at Vigo after their action with Sir Robert Calder, and were now in Cadiz. "Offer your services,” said Blackwood; but after he had gone Nelson wanted resolution to declare his wishes to Lady Hamilton and his sisters, and tried to drive away the thought. "Let the man trudge it who’s lost his
FLAN OF TOULON, 1805.
budget,” he quoted, and went on pacing the “ quarter-deck ” walk in the garden ; but his countenance belied his lips. Lady Hamilton came up to him and told him she saw he was uneasy. He replied, “ No, he was as happy as possible, and would not give sixpence to call the king his uncle.” But Lady Hamilton soon got the truth from him. "Nelson,” said she, “however we may lament your absence, offer your services; they will be accepted, and you will gain a quiet heart by it; you will have a glorious victory, and then you may return here and be happy.” Tears sprang into his eyes.
His services were accepted as soon as they were offered. “Choose your own officers,” said Lord Barham, handing him the Navy List, "Choose yourself, my lord,” was the reply ; “ the same • spirit stirs the whole profession; you cannot
Digitized by^OOQlC
NELSON EMBARKS AT PORTSMOUTH.
33
choose wrong.” At half-past ten on Friday night (September 13th) he kissed his little daughter for the last time, and drove away from Merton.
On the 15th he embarked at Portsmouth—you can see the very spot here from the deck of the Victory. Behind the George Hotel still stands the stables through which he was forced to pass to escape the dense crowds that had gathered
“THEY RAS AFTER HIM BREAST-HIGH ” (p. 33).
to see him off. He tried to steal away by the back of the inn, down Penney Street, and on past Governor’s Green to Southsea Common; but the crowd gave chase, and came up with him at the water side. As he put off in the boat they ran after him breast-high into the water to touch his hand; sailors and townsmen broke into tears; some knelt down for his blessing; many held their hands aloft. Years before, when Nelson had lain wounded in his lodgings in Bond Street, after the affair at Teneriffe, and the mob came to make him light up his windows, when they heard that it was Nelson, they gave three cheers and left 3
Digitized by Google
34
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
him to sleep in peace. He was still the people's darling. Says Southey: “He served his country with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his strength ; and therefore they loved him as truly and fervently as he had loved England."
The Victory stood out under easy canvas for some while, until the last words had been spoken between her crew and the men and women in the shore-boats alongside, and then sho and her Admiral sailed away, taking the hopes of England with them.
With the Victory went the Euryalus frigate, and off Plymouth they were joined by the Ajax and Thunderer. They arrived off Cadiz on the 29th of September (Nelson’s birthday) and Collingwood gave up the command; but there was no salute fired nor signal hoisted, for the Admiral did not want the enemy to know of his arrival He believed he had to play his fish once more. He therefore kept the main body of his fleet out of sight of land, some fifty or sixty miles to the west of Cadiz, and always preserved his line of battle in sailing: the fleet in two lines, with an advance squadron of eight of the swiftest two-deckers. His plan of attack (so far as it could be arranged beforehand) was clear in his mind, and there never was a simpler. " Nelson’s touch,” as he called it, resembled Napoleon’s favourite plan of smashing the enemy's line in the centre, and turning quickly on the two broken halves. Nelson, of course, commanded one line, and Collingwood the other. Collingwood’s line was to set all its sails, even its steering sails, to get as quickly as possible to the enemy, and cut through his line at about the twelfth ship from the rear. Nelson would strike the centre; while the advance squadron was to lop off some three or four ships ahead of the centre. This plan was to be adapted to the strength of the enemy, so that the British should always be one-fourth superior to those whom they cut oft. “ I will suppose twenty sails of the enemy's line to be untouched: it must be some time before they could perform a manoeuvre to bring their force compact to attack any part of the British fleet engaged, or to succour their own ships, which, indeed, would be impossible without mixing with the ships engaged.” The object, too, was simply a close and decisive action. “ In case signals cannot be seen or clearly understood, no captain can do very wrong if he places his ship alongside that of an enemy.”
Nelson sent Collingwood this plan of attack on October the 9th; “ We can my dear Coll,” said he, “ have no little jealousies. We have only one great object in view—that of annihilating our enemies, and getting a glorious peace for our country.” The French had not yet tried Collingwood’s mettle, but the English service knew well what manner of man he was.
On the very day of Nelson’s arrival to take command of the Mediterranean fleet, arrived at Cadiz a courier with the French Emperor's orders for M. Villeneuve to put to sea at once, and by October the 10th he and the Spanish Admiral, Gravina, were ready to obey, but hard gales delayed them. It v.^s
Digitized byVrOOQlC
“THE EYES OF THE FLEET."
35
not till seven o’clock on the morning of the 19th that the Franco-Spanish fleet began getting under weigh, with a gentle breeze at N. by E.
It was at half-past nine that the Mars (who, with the Defence and Agamemnon, formed the cordon of communication with the frigates on the watch in-shore) made the signal that the enemy was coming out of pork The wind was now S.S.W. Nelson sprang to the poop, and gave the signal for a chase to the south-east. About two the repeating ships signalled that the combined fleets were at sea. “ The enemy have put to sea, my lord! ” sang out the second lieutenant. “ Steer south-east,” answered Nelson, “ and make more sail! ”
All night the British fleet continued steering to the south-east. Those who had the middle watch on board the Victory hardly cared to turn in. Dawn lifted, and they found themselves in the entrance of the straits, but nothing of the enemy could bo seen. Upon this the fleet wore, and made sail by the north-west; and at seven o’clock the Phoebe frigate signalled that the enemy was in sight, bearing north. Nelson remained on deck from daylight till dark Just before sunset Blackwood telegraphed from the Euryalus that the enemy appeared determined to go to the westward. Nelson answered that he relied upon Blackwood’s keeping sight of them during the night. He was short of frigates, or, as ho called them, “the eyes of the fleet;” but his four frigate captains served him well The enemy was well observed throughout the night: all their movements were reported and, as they wore twice, Nelson inferred that they were aiming to keep the port of Cadiz open, and would retreat there as soon as they saw the British fleet. For this reason he was careful not to approach near enough to be seen during the night
And at daybreak there the enemy lay distinctly visible from the Victory's deck—thirty-three sail of the line and seven large frigates, forming a long crescent in close line of battle ahead on the starboard tack off Cape Trafalgar, close to the southernmost point of Andalusia. Our fleet consisted of twentyseven sail of the line and four frigates. Their superiority was even greater in size and weight of metal than in numbers, and they had four thousand troops dispersed about the fleet.
Soon after daylight, Nelson came on deck. The 21st of October was a festival in his family, because on that day his uncle. Captain Suckling, of the Dreadnought, with two other line-of-battle ships, had beaten off a French squadron of four sail of the line and three frigates; and he had more than once expressed his persuasion that this was to be his day of battle also. He wore his “fighting-coat”—a threadbare frock uniform-coat, with four weather-tarnished and lustreless stars sewn on the left breast. It is curious to note the dress in which these heroes went into action. Collingwood pulled oft' his boots and put on silk stockings, at the same time ordering his lieutenant to do the same. “ If we should get a shot in the leg,” he explained, “ it will be handier for the surgeon ; ” Rotherham, of the Royal Sovereign, was advised
Digitized by LnOOQle
36
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
not to wear his cocked-hat, the gold lace of which would offer an easy mark to the riflemen. “ Let me alone,'1 said he; “I have always fought in my cocked-hat, and I always shall.” Nelson’s argument for wearing his stars was even more splendidly illogical: “ In honour I gained them, and in honour I will die with them 1 ’’
At about half-past six he took down the glass from his eye and called to
“BLACKWOOD AND HARDY WITNESSED THE WILL1* (p. 38).
his signal-officer to make the signal to bear down on the enemy in two lines.; and the fleet set all sail. Collingwood, in the Royal Sovereign, led the lee-line of thirteen ships; the Victory led the weather-line of fourteen. Having seen that all was as it should be, Nelson went down to his cabin.
It was his habit to begin battle with a prayer, for he had the profoundest belief that God was for England. In the cabin he wrote a simple prayer in his diary, and annexed to it his last testament, or, rather, a last request to his country in case he fell It was headed: " October 21st, 1805. Then in sight of the combined fleets of France and Spain, distant about ten miles.” After recommending Lady Hamilton and his adopted daughter Horatia to his
Digitized by
Google
"MOUNTED TO THE QUARTERDECK AS IF IT WERE A THRONE” (p. 40).
Digitized by
Google
38
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
country’s gratitude, he ended: “ These are the only favours I ask of my king and country at this moment when I am going to fight their battle. May God bless my king and country, and all those I hold dear. My relations it is needless to mention: they will, of course, be amply provided for.”
Blackwood and Hardy witnessed the will. While he wrote, his ships were standing down, under full sail, towards the enemy. Blackwood had come on board the Victory about six. He found Nelson cheerful, but calm; not in that exhilaration of spirits with which he went into battle at Aboukir and Copenhagen ; he seemed to feel that his time was come, and looked for death with almost as sure an expectation as for victory. Just now his whole attention was fixed upon the enemy. At 8.30 they wore and made northwards, thus dexterously bringing the. shoals of Trafalgar and St. Pedro under the British lee, and leaving the port of Cadiz open for themselves.
Villeneuve was a skilful seaman, and had made his dispositions well. His ships lay in double line with their heads pointing north, and formed a crescent convexing to leeward. These two lines were formed of Frenchmen and Spaniards in good and correct order, each ship being about a cable’s length off her neighbour ahead and astern. Villeneuve’s own ship, the Bucentaure (eighty guns), was in the centre, and Gravina’s flag floated in the rear on board the Principe de Asturias.
Villeneuve’s double line was well designed thus :— <1 a. <‘ <; <‘<> ^i.
Africa^ P'™^ ^tnxMum ^^^^^ 	^?>v- r * \	&HLXDXOV0MT JlL^ A	(®r	Pxvtwr *	obJ""111 -X" ^~^	* ^ “**^ A	0X41*BW00 B'S *DI<lsI°* BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR. Slut. Odobcr. 1805.	^Nerruao *KtC>«ON 9^I«Yre^DC	L _ R	RCORNtUt ^RayD	w FOImrnifLtflk OWGVAV TnQuiNWsMONT BlA*C UKE'KC M All**LAUGUST <M0 . r funtr fet hohvchm ^	fcWCPTUK NEMVTAIlJE	^8.1i*M0TO CVERtlOK	> WlUDOllFTA'Ut ^FOuGutux *	V OnahcA LU TO*	f ” ^ALKMRAt |	T^rrrff AlQtC 8	*	\	Api*/;. V Bahama	* ^SaiFTSURt AltGONMlTK^	^.MoaTaMB
K^/crfrMC	6.Juan MEKMucttfO^ ^ British	$>	8.1 iwrcw/ —	^ACwltl /nwA-™—-|> S^ni^	»	$.K(U1 PLAN OF THE BATTLE OF TRAFALGAR.	Jocmc,^ ^THtwi, ^hEkMi&M ARGONAUTA n F- <W A AtllRlAS^
Digitized by LxOOQle
ENGAGE!
39
Now, suppose the line broken in the direction of the arrow, just astern of No. 6 : then No. 2 closes in behind, and the British ship, in hauling up, falls aboard of her: upon which No. 7 bears up and takes her, while, as like as not, No. 1 helps with a broadside on her port bow. As it happened, the manoeuvre succeeded only with two of our ships, the Tonnant and Bellerophon, both of which were badly punished. .
Straight for this crescent the two British lines were steered. The leeline, under Collingwood in the Royal Sovereign, consisted of thirteen ships, the Belle isle, Mars, Tonnant, Bellerophon, Cologne, Achille, Polyphemue, Revenge, Swifttsure, Defiance, Thunderer, Defence. Nelson, steering two points further to the north (to cut off the enemy's retreat to Cadiz), led the weather-line with the Victory; and after her came the Timeraire, Neptune, Conqueror, Leviathan, Ajax, Orion, Agamemnon, Minotaur, Spartiate, Britannia, Africa, Prince, and Dreadnought—fourteen in all. Then followed, as tail, the four frigates, the Euryaltm, Sirius, Phoebe, and Naiad, with the Pickle schooner and Eutreprenante cutter.
The crews had finished their dinner, and were now hanging about and gossiping by their guns, or getting ready their fire-buckets, rammers, and cartridges. The shot was piled, the powder passed up from the magazines. The battle-field was spread—a plain of dark blue with a long heavy swell rolling up from westward, and the noonday sun shining on the fresh-painted sides of the enemy. Before the swell the British ships moved majestically, with light winds from the south-west The British admirals hoisted their own Hags, and the others the white or St George’s ensign. Besides this, each British ship carried a Union Jack at her inaintopmast-stay, and another at her foretopgallant-stay. At the Victory’s maintopgallant-masthead, also, Nelson had fast belayed his pet signal—No. 1G, "Engage the enemy more closely”— consisting of two flags, quarter red and white over blue, white and red. By this time, too, the enemy had hoisted his ensigns; and, in addition, each Spanish ship hung out a large wooden cross at the end of her spanker-boom.
*: During the five hours and a half,” says Blackwood, " that I remained on board the Victory, in which I was not ten times from his side, Nelson frequently asked me what I should consider as a victory, the certainty of which he never, for an instant, seemed to doubt, although from the situation of the land he questioned the possibility of a subsequent preservation of the prizes. My answer was, ‘ That, considering the handsome way the battle was offered to the enemy, their apparent determination for a fair trial of strength, and the proximity of the land, I thought if fourteen ships were captured it would be a glorious result.' To which he always replied, ‘I shall not, Blackwood, be satisfied with anything short of twenty.’ ” Blackwood tried to persuade him that his life was too precious to be exposed unnecessarily, and proposed hoisting his flag in the Euryalus, whence he could better see what was going on. But Nelson would not hear of it " It would be a bad
Digitized byVrOOQlC
40
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
example,” he said. His “ feyness ” seemed to increase in these last moments before the battle. He bowed his head to the crew as they cheered him, and mounted to the quarter-deck as if it were a throne. The captains, considering that the Victory, as the van-ship of a column, and the flag-ship of the Commander-in-Chief, would draw upon herself the whole weight of the enemy's fire, desired that Nelson might be persuaded to allow the T&meraire, then close astern, to pass ahead. Blackwood undertook the delicate task of
broaching the matter. “Oh! yes, let her go ahead,” said Nelson —meaning, if she could. Blackwood, returning after delivering this order, found Nelson doing all he could to increase rather than shorten sail, and severely rating a lieutenant who had taken in a small studding-sail merely for the purpose of getting it set better. The Victory continued to lead the column. Indeed, when at length the T^m^raire ranged up as if to pass, Nelson could stand it no longer. Forgetting his previous order, he called out, a little through his nose, as he always did, “ Captain Harvey, I request you to keep in your proper station, which is astern of the Victory! ”
mu collisowood. And now no other signal (Ftom an Eivj^ving by Chur fa Turner.) „ .
seemed wanting, when Nelson remarked that he must give the fleet something by way of a fillip. Accordingly, at about ten minutes before noon, up went to the Victory’a mizzen top-gallant-masthead the first part of the famous message—Nelson’s last signal —" ENGLAND EXPECTS THAT EVERY MAN WILL DO HIS DUTY.”
As soon as this signal was read by the other ships there ran through the British fleet one of those thrills, electric and unanimous, which the Greeks used to assign to the direct inspiration of Heaven. Out broke a cheer and ran from deck to deck, gathering volume as it rolled. The signal spoke like a voice from home, and the shout that answered it promised victory. “ Now,” said Nelson, “ I can do no more. We must trust to the Great Disposer of all events and the justice of our cause.”
The weather column was steered two points further north than Collingwood's, in order to cut off the enemy's escape into Cadiz: the lee-line,
Digitized by LnOOQle
“YONDER IS YOUR ENEMY!"
41
therefore, was first engaged. At about ten minutes past noon the Royal Sovereign, steered as straight and steadily as if she were going into Portsmouth Harbour, drove into the centre of Villeneuve’s crescent.
•‘See’” cried Nelson, “see how that noble fellow Collingwood takes his ship into action.”
At about the same moment, on the deck of the Royal Sovereign, Collingwood turned to his captain and exclaimed—
“Rotherham, what would not Nelson give to be here!”
Colli n g wood ■nd Rotherham bad been on ill tenns till yesterday, when Nelson reconciled them.
“THE BRITISH RHU'S MOVED MAJESTICALLY” (p. 39>
“Look!” he had said, “yonder is your enemy!” and made them shake hands like Englishmen. •
The Royal Sovereign passed astern of the Santa Anna, a three-decker of 112 guns; poured in her double-shotted guns as she passed with such fatal precision as not only to shatter the Spaniard’s stern-frame but to kill 400 of her crew and disable fourteen of her guns, and then, luffing up close alongside, engaged her to leeward, with yard-arms locked and guns almost muzzle to muzzle. Instantly the Fovguevx ranged up and raked her astern, while three more of the enemy peppered her bows. Finding, however, that they were injuring each other by their own cross-fire, and that Collingwood's followers, the Mars, Bellisle, and Tonnant, were quickly coming up to their
Digitized by LnOOQle
42
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
leader’s support, the four ships one by one drew off from the Royal Sovereign, and left her to fight out her duel with the Santa Anna.
Meanwhile, the Victory held on her way with the weather-line. She flew half a dozen flags aloft, for fear that one might be shot away; but although every glass on board was used no one could discover the flag of the French commander-in-chief, whose ship Nelson desired to grapple with. As the Victory slowly advanced seeking her antagonist, the enemy’s ships ahead began measuring distances with her by firing single shots, until they saw a shot pass through the main top-gallant sail A minute or two of dead silence followed; and then, as if by concerted signal, the whole van, or at least seven or eight of the weathermost ships, opened upon the Victory such a fire as has seldom been directed upon a single ship. They fired high, aiming chiefly at her rigging, in the hope to disable her before she could close with them. Nelson at once ordered Blackwood, and Prowse of the Siriue, to go on board their frigates and inform all the line-of-bat tie captains as they passed that they were at liberty to disregard his plan of action if they could come quicker or closer alongside the enemy in any other way. Blackwood shook hands with him and said, " I hope, my lord, that on my return to the Victory, which will be as soon as possible, I shall find your lordship well, and in possession of twenty prizes.” He answered, " God bless you, Blackwood; I— shall never see you again.”
Turning, he saw that the jack-yard of the lower studding-sail was being cut away to clear the tack, for he had given orders that no sail should be taken in, for fear of lumbering the decks. “ What’s all this ? ” he called out “ Haul that tack out at once, or the Frenchmen will think we arc shortening sail because we’re hit”
Still the Victory moved down, silent and intent, firing no shot until twenty of her men were killed, thirty wounded, her mizzen topmast and every studding-sail boom on the fore-mast shot away, and every sail in tatters. The Admiral’s secretary, Mr. Scott, was one of the first to fall. He was talking with Hardy on the quarter-deck, when a round shot came and cut him in half. Captain Adair, of the Marines, with the help of a sailor, tried to remove the body, but the Admiral had noticed it
“ Is that poor Scott that’s gone ? ” he asked.
Just after a double-headed shot tore across the poop and killed eight marines: whereupon Nelson desired Captain Adair to disperse his men about the ship, that they might not suffer so much from being together. A minute or two later a shot struck the fore-brace-bits on the quarter-deck, sending the splinters right and left, and passed between Nelson and Hardy, a splinter tearing off Hardy’s buckle and bruising his foot. They stopped and looked anxiously at each other, each supposing the other to be wounded. Nelson then smiled, and said: “This is too warm work, Hardy, to last long.”
Having no means of distinguishing the French Admiral's ship, Nelson
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE FIRST SHOT.
43
characteristically chose the largest of all, the great four-decker Santisima Trinidad (130 guns), his old acquaintance, as he used to call her. She was the ninth ship in the van of the crescent; and to her bows he ordered the Victory to be steered. The French and Spanish ships, however, seeing by her course that the Victory was about to follow the example of the Royal Sovereign, closed together like a forest. It was not possible to break the eneniy’s line without running on board one of their ships.
“ Which will you run aboard ? ” Hardy asked.
“Take your choice: it doesn’t signify much." Hardy steered for the stern of the Bucentaure, passing her so closely that, had there been wind enough to blow it out, the Victory’s crew might have tom away the large French ensign trailing at her peak. Just exactly at one o’clock the first of the Victory's guns—the 68-pounder carronade on the port side of her forecastle, holding its usual charge of one round shot and a keg filled with 500 musket-balls—was fired right into the cabin windows of the Bucentaure ; and, as the Victory slowly went past, every gun of the remaining fifty on her broadside, all double and some of them treble, shotted, was fired deliberately into the helpless Frenchman. She, as it turned out, was M. Villeneuve’s ship, and this one broadside as good as finished her. In two minutes, though not a mast or yard was seen to come down, she lost close on four hundred men, and had twenty of her guns dismounted: her fate was scaled, and she did little more before surrendering to the Conqueror at about two in the afternoon.
As the Victory passed clear of her, receiving in her turn a elever fire from the French Neptune, Hardy ordered the master to put the helm hard-a-port, and ran on board the Redoutuble, just as her tiller ropes were shot away. The French ship received her with a broadside, then instantly let down her lower deck ports, for fear of being boarded through them, and never fired another great gun from them during the action. Her tops were filled with riflemen. Nelson would never place musketry in his tops; he held that it not only risked setting fire to the sails, but was a petty form of warfare that killed men without ever deciding the fate of a battle.
These two ships dropped alongside of each other about ten minutes past one. The Redoutuble fired her main-deck guns and kept up a storm of musketry. The Victory replied by firing her starboard 68-pounder carronade right upon the Redoutables decks, and making play also from her middle and lower decks. Sho kept up a fairly effective fire, too, upon the Bucentaure. and the Santisima Trinidad, the two ships drifting away from her on her larboard hand. Twice, as the Redoutable’s guns became silent, Nelson, supposing she had struck (for she carried no flag), gave the order to cease firing, and turned his attention to the larboard guns, hoping to give the Bmeniaure her coup de grace; but at once the firing from the Redoutable’s tops grew brisker. It descended like hail whenever the smoke lifted a little from the Victory’s deck, revealing the epaulets of our officers; and there was a
Digitized by LnOOQle
44
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
fellow kneeling in the mizzen-top, in glazed hat and white jacket, who had a bullet in his pouch that was to do more damage than all the ships of France and Spain.
Nelson, while the Victory had been fitting to receive his flag, had ordered
"THEKE WAS A FELLOW KXCRUXG LX THE KIZZBX-Tur'' (p. H).
a large skylight over his cabin to be removed, and the space planked up, so as to afford him a walk amidships of about twenty-one feet, clear of the guns and ropes. It was about twenty-five minutes past one, and Nelson and Hardy were pacing here together, to and fro. The two had arrived within one pace of the regular turning-spot at the cabin ladder-way, when Nelson (who, regardless of quarter-deck etiquette, was walking on the larboard side) suddenly faced left about. Hardy turned almost at the same instant, and saw him in the act of falling. A musket-ball had struck him on the left shoulder, by the edge of the epaulet, cut through the spine, and buried itself in tho
Digitized by
Google
THE DEATH WOUND.
45
muscles of the back towards the right side. He dropped at once upon his side, on the spot yet red with the blood of poor Scott.
Seeker, a sergeant of Morines, and two privates, ran forward to pick him up.
“ They have done it at last, Hardy," said Nelson, as he was lifted.
“I hope not”
“Yes; my backbone is shot through."
Yet even now he had presence of mind, as they were carrying him down to the cockpit, to observe that the tiller-ropes, which had been shot away, were not yet replaced, and to order that new ones should be rove immediately. He next ordered his bearers to cover his face with a handkerchief that the crew might not recognise him; but the precaution was vain. The news was all over the ship in a minute. Many wounded officers and about forty men were
“ HE DKOPPBD AT ONCE ” (p. 45).
being carried below at the same time; among them Lieutenant Rann and Mr. Whipple, the Captain’s clerk, who had actually been killed by the wind of a shot He was sent down to see if the tiller-ropes had been replaced. Young Westphall—afterwards Sir George—to whom the question was put, was
Digitized by
Google
46
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
about to answer it, when a shot passed Whipple, and with a sob he fell down dead. He had neither scratch nor mark upon him. A second after Westphall was wounded in the head. At the foot of the ladder the purser met the wounded Admiral, and had him carried over the heaps of wounded and laid upon the purser’s mattress, on the larboard side, close by Westphall, who lay there waiting for his wound to be dressed. Somebody rolled up the Admiral’s coat and placed it under the head of the youngster, who was bleeding freely, so that when he was removed it was found that the bullion of Nelson’s epaulet adhered to the coagulated blood, and it had to be cut away. It was claimed by another man, Lieutenant Pascoe, who also lay wounded close by, and on his recovery he had the piece of gold set in a brooch with the motto of Trafalgar Day around it
But we must leave Nelson for a moment and go back to the Victory's upper deck. For the moment it seemed deserted, most of the effective men left being employed in carrying the wounded below, while Captain Hardy, Captain Adair of the Marines, and one or two other officers alone remained upon the quarterdeck and poop. Below, too, her guns were silent, owing to the belief that the Redoubtable, having discontinued her fire, was on the eve of surrendering; but Captain Jean-Jacques-Etienne Lucas had no such idea, for the time at least. On the contrary, this gallant commander now gave orders to his men to board the English three-decker. Numbers of the French crew quickly gathered in the chains and gangway of the ship, and were only repulsed by a determined sally on the part of the Victory’s men, who rushed up from the middle and lower decks, and by the difficulty they encountered in the curve of the two ships' sides, which prevented their springing from one to another. The repulse cost the Victory dearly. Captain Adair was killed by a musket-ball as he stood on the gangway encouraging his men. With him fell eighteen marines and twenty seamen; and, as the Redoutdble men fell back, their ship was menaced on another quarter.
When she bore down on the enemy, the Victory, being an extraordinary fast-sailing ship, would probably, like the Royal Sovereign, have left the ships in her wake far astern, had not her next successor, the Temdraire, been lightly laden, or (as the sailors put it) “ flying light.” As it was, as soon as the Victory became damaged, the Temdraire hod to yaw from time to time to avoid passing her, and when the Victory put the helm hard-a-port to run on board the Red out able, the Temeraire had to do the same to keep clear of her leader. She then stood a little way to the south-east, and hauled up to pass through the enemy's line. But meanwhile the two locked ships had also been drifting to eastward, and at 1.40 p.m. the Red<actable's bowsprit passed over the Temeraire's gangway almost amidships, where (in order to bo able to rake her at their ease) the 7'e»ie retire's crew promptly lashed it. Tho French two-decker therefore, which a moment before had so splendidly assailed tho Victory, now found herself tight ami fast between the English three-
Digitized by Goode
“DOWN IN THE COCKPIT.
47
deckers, and swept by a most destructive fire. Nearly two hundred of her crew were hors de combat. Captain Lucas, though a sick man and badly wounded, refused to quit his deck, and fought his ship until twenty minutes post two, when out of a crew of 643 she had lost 300 killed and 222 wounded. In the whole story of Trafalgar there is no finer episode than the magnificent resistance offered by the Redoutable to these two British three-deckers, the pick of the British fleet.
Down in the cockpit of the Victory the surgeon soon perceived that Nelson's wound was mortaL Nelson himself was certain of this from the first, and insisted that Surgeon Beatty should go and attend to others; "for,” said he, “you can do nothing for me.” His sufferings from pain and thirst were very great, and all that could be done was to fan him with paper and give him lemonade from time to time. He kept asking for Hardy, that he might know how the fight went; but Hardy could not leave the deck at this most critical stage of the fight, and it was more than an hour before he thought it right to go below. Nelson began to think he must be dead, and repeatedly cried, " Will no one bring Hardy to me ? He must be killed 1 hd is surely dead I"
Hardy's aide-dc-camp, Mr. Bulkly, came down to the cockpit and told the surgeon the reasons that detained the captain, but promised that ho would take the first opportunity to leave the deck.
“ Who brought the message ? ” Nelson inquired, for his sight was dim,
“ Mr. Bulkly, my lord.”
" I thought I knew the voice. Bulkly, remember me to your father.”
And now even to those in the cockpit the result of the action began to declare itself. . As often as a ship struck the crew of the Victory sent up a cheer, and at every hurrah a gleam of joy passed over the face of the dying Admiral. When at length Hardy came down and took his hand in silence, Nelson's first question was, “How goes the day with us ? ”
“Very well, my lord. We have taken ten ships; but five of their van have tacked and mean to bear down on us; but I have called two or three of our fresh ships round, and have no doubt of giving them a drubbing.”
“None of ours have struck, I hope?”
“ There is no fear of that.”
“I am a dead man, Hardy; I am going fast; it will be all over with mo soon.”
Hardy tore himself away and ran up on deck, unable any longer to hold back his tears. Soon alter the Victory opened her larboard guns upon RearAdmiral Dumanoir’s squadron passing to windward. The concussion of the tiring shook the cockpit. “ Oh, Victory, ■ Victory ! how you distract my poor brain.” After a short pause he added, “ How dear is life to all men ’ ” By this time all feeling below the breast was gone.
In another fifty minutes Hardy came down to tho cockpit again, and,
Digitized by LnOOQle
48
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
again taking the hand of his dying friend and commander, congratulated him on a complete victory. How many of the enemy were taken he did not know, as it was impossible to see them distinctly through the smoke, but fourteen or fifteen at least.
"That’s well,” cried Nelson;
SIB THOMAS MASTER MAS HA HOT.
(From ^ Portrait by R- Evans.)
"but I bargained for twenty.”
Then, in -a
stronger voice, “ Anchor, Hardy —anchor’”
"I have sent Lieutenant Hill to Lord Collingwood, who, I suppose, will now take upon himself the direction of affairs.”
" Not whilst I live, Hardy— no other man shall command whilst I live! ” He tried to raise himself up from his pallet. " Anchor, Hardy, anchor' ”
Hardy was returning to deck when Nelson called him back and begged him to bend close. He then delivered his last injunctions—that his hair might be cut off and given to Lady Hamilton, and that his body might not be thrown overboard, but taken home to England and buried beside his parents, unless the king should order otherwise.
" Take care of my dear Lady Hamilton ; take care of poor Lady Hamilton I ”
Last of all he begged Hardy to kiss him.
"Kiss me, Hardy,” said he. Hardy knelt down and kissed his cheek and forehead.
“ Who is that ? ”
“ It is Hardy, my lord.”
" God bless you, Hardy."
Hardy now left him for the last time. Nelson was turned on his right side, and death was now rapidly approaching. He muttered some inarticulate sentences, ending, “ Remember that I leave Lady Hamilton and my daughter Horatia as a legacy to my country.”
Then once or twice he was heard to murmur to himself, “ I have done my duty; I praise God for it.” These were his last words.
At half-past four, three hours and a quarter after he had received his wound, Nelson of the Nile was dead.
Digitized by
Google
REVENGE.
49
The fight was over before this—indeed, but a minute or so before, the last guns fired after the beaten enemy were heard in the cockpit
Within a very few minutes of the Redoutable’s falling between the Victory and Temeraire there were only two Frenchmen left alive on her mizzen-top. One of these was the man who had shot our Admiral, An old quartermaster had seen him fire, and recognised him by his glazed hat and white coat He pointed him out to two midshipmen, Mr. Collingwood and Mr. Pollard, the only
NELSON IN THE COCKPIT UE THE YKTunr.
(from the Picture by A. JR Denis.)
persons now left on the Victory's poop. These two midshipmen kept firing at the top, and the quartermaster supplied them with cartridges. One of the Frenchmen tried to escape down the rigging, but Mr. Pollard shot him and tumbled him on to the poop.
“That's not the one,” cried the quartermaster; "the other—the other 1
The other Frenchman came forward to fire again. His gun went off, and the quartermaster, still pointing and shouting, received the shot in his mouth and fell dead. At the same moment both midshipmen fired together. The fellow flung up his hands and tumbled on the top. When the RedoutaUe struck, they climbed to the mizzen-top and found him lying there dead, with a ball through his head and another through his breast.
Digitized by
Google
50
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
The battle was over, and no English ship had struck, although one or two, such os the Bellville, which had been fighting with three ships at once, the Royal Sovereign, whom we left fighting the Santa Anna (a ship which she took after a hot and uninterrupted fight of two hours), were little better than floating hulks. When the Spanish captain came on the deck of the Royal Sovereign to hand over his sword, ho asked the name of the conquering-vessel and, on being told, said, smilingly, patting one of the guns with his hand, “ I think she ought to be called the Royal Devil.”
Of the nineteen ships composing the enemy’s rear eleven were captured, seven were in flight, and the remaining one, the Achille, blew up. The last shot from the enemy, or almost the last, camo from Rear-Admiral Dumanoir, who, as he passed with four of his van, fired, not only into the Victory and other English ships, but, less honourable, into the captured Spanish ships, to the Spaniards’ bitter indignation. Rear-Admiral Dumanoir and his four ships went but little further before they were taken, every one, by Sir Richard Strachan.
Just as the battle ended. Cape Trafalgar was seen from the Royal Sovereign, bearing S.E. by E., distant eight miles. Hence the name given to this battle, the immediate result of which was seventeen French and Spanish ships captured and one French ship burnt The total British loss amounted to 1,587. Unhappily the fleet did not anchor as Nelson had ordered almost with his latest breath. A gale arose from the south-west; some of the prizes sank, some were cast ashore; one escaped into Cadiz, others were destroyed; four only were saved. The Spanish Vice-Admiral Alava died of his wounds. Villeneuve is said to have destroyed himself on his way back to France; but the displeasure of Napoleon had a way of producing such suicides; and indeed, though he never acknowledged the loss of Trafalgar, he had reason to be wroth; for in its effect upon history it must rank as a decisive battle, if ever one was fought in the world. So perfectly had Nelson performed his work, that (to use Southey’s words) “ The maritime war was, after the battle of Trafalgar, considered at an end. The fleets of the enemy were not merely defeated but destroyed. New navies must be built, and a new race of seamen reared for them, before the possibility of invading our shores could, again be contemplated.” In truth, it marked the real turning-point of Napoleon’s fate, even though his most splendid victories came later. Trafalgar once fought, Waterloo became but . a question of time.
Nelson’s body was taken home. Collingwood wished to send It in the Euryalwt, but the men of the Victory begged so hard for the honour that he gave way. The Victory sailed from Gibraltar on the 7th of November, and after a rough and tedious passage reached Portsmouth on December the 2nd. Oft’ Usbant she was met by Admiral Cornwallis and the Channel Fleet. The Victory signalled that she had Nelson’s body on board, and the flag was shown at half-mast. Cornwallis passed under her stern, and his ship’s
Digitized by GOOQle
“IN THE VAULT OF ST. PAUL'S.”
51
company gave three dumb cheers, waving their hats while they checked their voices. The Dead March in “ Saul" was played by the band, and the Channel Fleet passed into the distance without a cheer or a word.
On the 10th of December the Victory again sailed from Portsmouth, and on the 22nd, when crossing from Margate, was boarded by the yacht' which the Admiralty had dispatched for the body. The body was placed in the famous coffin which Captain Hallowell had made from the timbers of the Orient in 1799. The coffin was lowered into tho yacht, and the Victory struck, for the last time, Lord Nelson's flag at the fore. He lies now in the vault of St. Paul’s, whither he was borne with all the vain pomp that the nation could lavish upon him ; and as the coffin was lowered the sailors took the flag that covered it and tore it into strips, to keep to their death and leave to their children as a memento of their darling leader.
' It was not,” says Southey, “from any selfish reflection upon the magnitude of our loss that we mourned for him: the general sorrow was of a high character. The people of England grieved that funeral ceremonies, public monuments, and posthumous rewards were all which they could now bestow upon him whom the King, the Legislature, and the nation alike would have delighted to honour; whom every tongue would have blessed; whose presence in every village through which he might have passed would have wakened the church bells, have given the schoolboys a holiday, have drawn children from their sports to gaze upon him, and ‘ old men from tho chimney corner ’ to look upon Nelson ere they died. The victory of Trafalgar was celebrated, indeed, with the usual forms of rejoicing, but they were without joy. For such already was the glory of the British Navy, through Nelson’s surpassing genius, that it scarcely seemed to receive any addition from the most signal victory that was ever achieved upon the seas; and the destruction of this mighty fleet, by which all the maritime schemes of France were totally frustrated, hardly appeared to add to our security or strength; for while Nelson was living to watch the combined squadrons of the enemy, we felt ourselves as secure as now, when they are no longer in existence.”
Digitized by LnOOQle
CHAPTER III.
THE NEW MAN-OF-WAR: THE VICTORIA.
Tim Victory and Victoria compared—Early Ironclads—The Merrimac in Hampton Roads—The Cumberland sunk and the Concrete burned—The Second Day’s Action: Merrimac v. Monitor—Description of the Victoria—The Conning Tower—Mr, Arnold Forster's story of H.M.S. Mycotic—The Fatal Ram — Fate of the Victoria—Admiral Tryon’s blunder—The collision with the Campcrdoum—The Admiral's Memorandum.
SUCH was the work done by the old “ Hearts of Oak.’’ But the day for such work is over. Tako up the Navy List, and you will still find the old names—the names that won immortality at St Vincent, the Nile, and Trafalgar. But the ships themselves, their armaments, their modes of attack and defence, are all changed. Not only would Nelson's famous “ touch" be impossible today, but one single shot from the big gun of a modern ironclad would send any one of Nelson’s ships to the bottom of the sea As iron has superseded wood, so have our guns increased in size and diminished in numbers.	At
Trafalgar three of the English ships carried 100 guns apiece, and one big Spaniard 130 guns. In our present Navy there is no such thing as a 100-gun ship, or a seventy-four, or a sixty-four. Some of our most powerful ships carry only some half-dozen large guns apiece. But there is some difference in the weight of these guns.
Taking the old Victory as a type of the finest British man-of-war of the wooden age, let us briefly compare her with the Victoria, which sank in 1893 off Tripoli, and was perhaps the most splendid specimen of a modern ironclad. The Victory'* hundred guns consisted of thirty thirty-two-pounders, thirty twenty-four-pounders, and forty twelve-pounders; and she had in addition two sixty-eight-poundcr carronades. The heaviest of these guns was under three tons, and the heaviest shot used was sixty-eight pounds. The Victorio, carried two guns of no less than 110 tons each, and each of these guns threw a shot of 1,800 pounds weight. Now the entire weight of metal discharged by a whole broadside of the Victory was 1,148 pounds. So that a single shot of the new ironclad weighed almost twice as much as a whole
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE OLD AND THE NEW.
53
broadside of the old three-decker; while the total weight of metal discharged from the broadside of the Victoria would be 4,750 pounds, or four times as heavy as the old Victory's broadside.
As for speed, the Victory, which when in full sail spread nearly an acre of canvas, depended, of course, entirely upon wind. She was an extremely quick sailer, and with a very good breeze astern could reach thirteen knots an hour. The Victoria in any ordinary weather could be driven by her engines at seventeen knots an hour.
The Victory carried a complement of 850 officers and men, the Victoria at the time ' of
her disaster carried a crew of 650, over 100 of whom were engineers and stokers.
The cost of an old line-of-battle ship was toughly reckoned at a thousand pounds a gun, so that the Victory would have cost
H.M.H. BLACK 1'iUXt:K.
about £100,000; the cost of such an ironclad as the Victoria is something like two-thirds of a million of money. Two such vessels would cost more than all Nelson’s fleet; and their tonnage would exceed that of the entire British Navy in Elizabeth’s day.
It was the increase in the calibre and effectiveness of guns that first gave rise to the ironclad; and it is only in recent years that the controversy, iron versus oak, has been finished. It sounds strange, but is a fact, that, owing to the much smaller thickness of the sides, a strong iron ship is less than half the weight of a wooden vessel of the same size and class; indeed, the proportion of actual weight is about six to twenty. An iron ship, therefore, displaces less water—that is, stands higher out of the water—and requires a greater weight on board to sink it to the same line. From this, and from the actual thinness of its walls, its carrying capacity is so much the greater. But this, which is a great point in the construction of merchant ships, docs not apply to an armoured vessel of war; for as guns become heavier and more perfect, defensive armour has to be strengthened, until wc reach iron plates between twenty and thirty inches thick. With every’ increase in strength wc hear of
Digitized by
Google
54
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
fresh discoveries in gunnery, and the invulnerable of to-day is the vulnerable of to-morrow. The actual weight of all this plating, with that of the engines and guns, is so great that a vast deal of room on board has to be unemployed, and hence the monstrous size of our first-class ships.
Tlie honour of inventing the ironclad belongs to the French, or rather the honour of first putting the invention into practice (unless we are to go back to Hiero of Syracuse, who covered one of his galleys with brass plates). Three floating batteries—La Devastation, La Tonnante, and La Lave—were used by them at the bombardment of Kinburn, in the Black Sea during the Crimean War in 1855. These were little more than heavily-plated barges, and the Russian gunners made a pet target of one of them. Twenty-five balls struck it point-blank, with no more result than the partial displacement of one of the iron plates, which were only an inch and a half thick. The result of this
experiment was to revolutionise naval architecture.
A year later M. Dupuy de Lome prepared for the French Admiralty the plans of La Gloire, the first ironclad frigate. She was launched in 1857, and
her architect, in asking for money to build, remarked:—“ One single ship of this description launched into the midst of a whole fleet of your old vessels would be like a lion among a flock of sheep."
The English followed suit with two fine frigates—the Wnrrior and Black Prince, sister ships—each 380 feet long, with a belt of armour four and a
half inches thick, and a displacement of 9,100 tons. They were masted and rigged as usual, and are still among the fastest sailers in the fleet; but as ships of war they are quite obsolete. Before the fire of such a ship as the Edinburgh, for instance, they would go down like ninepins. After these came
ships like the Northumberland, Minotaur, Agincourt, Inconstant, and Monarch,. But the truth of Dupuy de Lome’s remark was first verified in 1862, near the outset of the great American Civil War.
In April, 1861, at the beginning of the War of Secession, a number of ships of the United States Navy were lying off the Norfolk navy-yard in the
LA QLOIRK
(Drawn from Plant prepared by Jf. Ihtptty dr LAme far thr Fr«irA Xdwiral/ji.)
James River, Virginia. The Sou ther ners managed to pen these in bycrowding the channel with sunken hulks. In the end a few ships only escaped; among them, the Cumberland, with
Digitized by GOOQle
IN HAMPTON HOADS.
55
which our story is partly concerned. The rest were either scuttled or set on lire—three line of battle-ships, tho Pennsylvania, Columbus, and Delaware; four frigates, the Merrimac, Brandywine, Columbia, and Raritan; one sloop-of-war, the Germantown, and the brig, Dolphin — in all one-fourth of the American Navy. Of these the Merrimac, a steam frigate, had at first been
sunk in shallow water, above which her gun-deck showed. When she was afterwards set fire to, only her upper works wore burned. Consequently, when the Southerners came on Ac scene, it was no very difficult matter to pump the ship out and W her into dry-dock. At first the hulk was regarded as nearly Worthless; but after a ’’bile her captors hit
on the idea of patching ber up and fitting her
I'huto. Symt>H'i» «(' Co , I'uituttoiUh.
H.M.8. AGIXCWRT.
Oilt as an ironclad. They provided her with an iron ram, capable of dealing a severe blow "nder water. Her hull, cut down to within two Act of the water-line, ffas covered by a bomb-proof house with
a doping ^ the iron plates upon which were four and a half inches . M hile the hull was generally iron-plated, the bow and stern were covered
**th steel. She carried a seven-Inch rifle in' the bows, a similar gun aft; two r^es- #“fl six nine-inch in the broadside. “As she came ploughing
ough the water sho looked like a huge half-submerged crocodile.” The South-recTiristeiied her the Virginia, but her older name has clung to her.
which has made that name famous she did her work prac-The vessels opposed to her were of no inconsiderable size.
egress, Minnesota, and Ruunoake were frigates carrying a total nd nearly 2,000 men—the Cumberland especially being a he wooden frigate in the last age of wooden battle-ships, ood was proved to be of little avail against iron, however and there is little doubt that the officers of the Cumberland
.. , engagement ■ single.handed.
’ ovw 150 guns a
heTOK*'ly defended:
Digitized by
Google
56
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
and Congress, at any rate, knew the forlorn hope that lay before them, as soon as the Merrimac hove in sight on the memorable 8th of March, 1862.
The engagement was fought in the Hampton Roads, which was virtually an outlet of the James River. Like the Thames, the James River broadens out into many shallows at its mouth. The Merrimac left the Norfolk navy-yard (which holds to the James River somewhat the same position that Sheerness.
“IT WAS FIRED ... BY THE COXSWAIN, MATTHEW TIERNEY ” (p. 581
does to the Thames) early on the morning of the Sth, and steamed steadily down on the enemy’s fleet, accompanied by some smaller vessels of war and a few tug-boats.
It was a beautiful spring morning, bright and clear. The Merrimac was not expected, for the frigates lay with their boats at the booms, and the sailors’ clothes hanging to dry in the rigging. The Cumberland rode at single anchor, with her sails loosed to dry when, a half hour after noon, she spied the enemy. Soon the sails were furled and all hands beat to quarters—as tine a crew as ever manned a ship ; “ a crew," writes one of their oflicers, “ that, knowing no surrender, could they have had a motive power other than sails, would have whipped the Merrimac by the sheer force of their battery and their determination to conquer.” They had a chance to display all their heroism, though in a vain cause. “ The engagement,” wrote the Confederate Secretary of the Navy, "commenced at half-past three pin.;
Digitized by LnOOQle
CARNAGE,
57
and at four p.m, Captain Buchanan had sunk the Cumberland, captured and burned the Congress, disabled and driven the Minnesota ashore, and defeated the St. Lawrence and Roanoake, which sought shelter under the guns of Fortress Monroe. Two of the enemy’s small steamers were blown up, and the two
•'THE FIGHT WAS VERY ri’RlUl'8 ” (p. 62).
transport steamers were captured.1' As regards time this is a wild exaggeration, but is correct in the main.
The Merrimac began, shortly before three, by heading directly for the Congress, jivin? her a broadside and receiving one in return, the balls of which rattled from her sides like hail upon a roof. She then moved slowly across the bows of the Cumberland and manoeuvred for position to ram, training meanwhile ber forward guns upon the doomed ship. Her first shot passed through the starboard hammock netting, killing and wounding nine marines; and
Digitized by GOOQle
58 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
for some time, from a distance of about 300 yards, on the starboard bow, she continued to rake the Cumberland with every shot. The frigate could scarcely reply, being unable to use the wind to get into position. The second shell from the Merrimac burst among the crew of a gun that was being run out, destroying everyone except the powder-man, and disabling the gun for the rest of the action. The captain of this gun, a seaman named Kirker, had both arms taken off at the shoulder, but set his teeth and allowed not a groan to escape him as he was carried below. Not a man flinched; the dead were thrown over on the other side of the deck, and their places taken quietly, each man loading and firing as fast as the guns would work.
This carnage lasted for some fifteen minutes, when the Merrimac headed for the Cumberland, striking her on the starboard bow, knocking two of the ports into one, and driving her ram into the frigate below the water-line. Having done this, for awhile she could not free herself, and the sinking Cumberland began to bear her down until the water was over the forward deck. “ Had the officer forward on the spar-deck of tho Cumberland had the presence of mind to let go the forward-anchor, it would have fallen on the Merrimac’s decks and she would have been carried down in the iron embrace of the Cumberland.” But the chance was missed; the weight of the ram broke it off in the Cumberland’s side, and the Merrimac swung round broadside to the frigate. This was the Federal ship’s first chance and she at once poured in three solid broadsides, but with little effect, except to cut off the Merrimac's flagstaff, and thus bring down the Confederate colours. None of her crew ventured to replace them, and she fought thenceforward with only her pennant flying. But the Cumberland was sinking rapidly. As the water rose on the berth-deck, which by this time was filled with wounded, terrible cries went up from these poor wretches above the din of the battle. The Merrimac hailed and asked, "Will you surrender?" The answer went back: " Never. We will go down with our colours flying." Hearing this, the Southerner opened fire again, and in a few minutes rammed her enemy a second time—a needless stroke. The Cumberland's deck by this time was covered with dead and wounded, and slippery with blood ; some of the guns were run in as they hod last been fired, many of thein bespattered with blood; broken rammers and blackened sponges lay about in every direction. Still the men fought on, each anxious for “ one more shot.” At last the order was given for every man to look out for himself. Even then, and as the waters closed over the Cumberland, the last gun was heard. It was fired, though half under water, by the coxswain, Matthew Tierney, who perished with the ship. Among the last to leave was Lieutenant Thomas 0. Selfridge, who tells us that be at first tried to escape by the ward-room hatch ladder, but found the hatchway blocked by a fat drummer who was struggling up with his drum, and was afterwards picked up using it as a buoy. Selfridge then threw oft' his coat and
Digitized by GOOQle
THE MONITOR.
59
sword and squeezed out through one of the port-holes. Carding scores of poor fellows, the frigate plunged head first, with her stern high in air, and her Hag still flying from the peak. The whole number lost was not less than 120 souls. Her topmast reached high above the water, and her flag was left to wave over the dead who had defended it with their lives.
The Cumberland being thus disposed of, the Merrimac turned her attention
to the Congress. The Southerners, it may be mentioned in passing, generously forbore to fire on the boats, or on the small steamer, which were now engaged in picking up the survivors of the Cumberland's crew. The officers of the Congress, seeing their comrades’ fate, determined that the Merri-mae should not at least sink their vessel. They therefore crammed on all sail, and attempted to run ashore; but the Merrimac was soon close on them, and delivered broadside after broadside at less than 100 yards’ distance, doing terrible execution. The Congress responded pluckily, but with little effect. One shot is supposed to have
entered a port-hole of the ironclad and dismounted a gun, as there was no further firing from that port, and a few splinters of iron were ripped off her roof; but this was all. The guns of the Merrimac had apparently been specially trained on the after-magazine of the Congress, and shot after shot entered that part of the ship. Thus, slowly drifting down with the current, and again steaming up, for one hour the Merrimac continued to harass her opponent. Several times the Congress was on fire, but the flames were kept under. At length the ship was on fire in so many places, and the flames gathering with such force that her officers, seeing that to keep up the defence any longer would be vain, and even suicidal, hauled down the
Digitized by GOOQle
60 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
Stars and Stripes and hoisted a white flag at the peak. For some minutes this was not discerned through the clouds of smoke, and the firing went on. At length, however, the broadsides ceased, and a tug that had followed the Merrimac out of Norfolk came alongside the Can green, and ordered the officers on board. They refused, hoping that from the nearness of the shore they would be able to escape. About forty of the men, thinking that the tug was one of the Northern (Federal) vessels, rushed on board, and were, of course, soon carried off as prisoners. By the time that all the able men were off, ashore or elsewhere, it was seven o’clock in the evening, and the Congress a bright sheet of flame from stem to stern, her guns, which were loaded and trained, going off as the fire reached them. A shell from one struck a sloop at a little distance, and blew her up. At midnight the fire reached her magazines, containing five tons of gunpowder, and all that remained of the Congress was hurled into the air, with a terrific explosion.
Two ships were thus accounted for, and the Merrimac, about five in the afternoon, started to tackle the Minnesota, desiring rather to capture than to destroy her. She, therefore, stood off about a mile, and threw shot and shell at the frigate till nightfall, doing considerable damage. One shell entered near her waist, passed through the chief engineer’s room, knocking two rooms into one, and wounded several men ; another shot passed through the mainmast. As dark drew on the Merrimac, satisfied with her afternoon’s work, steamed in under Sewall Point. "The day," said the Baltimore American, “thus closed most dismally for our side, and with the most gloomy apprehensions of what might occur the next day. Tlie Minnesota was at the mercy of the Merrimac, and there appeared no reason why the iron monster might not clear the roads of our fleet, destroy all the stores and warehouses on the beach, drive all our troops into the fortress, and command Hampton Roads against any numbers of wooden vessels the Government might send there. Saturday was a terribly dismal night at Fortress Monroe.”
But the tables were about to be turned. About nine o’clock that night Ericsson’s battery, the Monitor, entered Hampton Roads. She looked a foolish and not very formidable craft. She lay low in the water, and might have been taken for a raft, having nothing above board but a round turret amidships, a small pilot-house forward, and a diminutive funnel aft. It was only7 on board that her real strength could be discovered. She carried annour about five inches thick over a large part of her, and had practically two hulls, the lower of which had sides inclining at an angle of 51° from the vertical line. It was believed that no shot could hurt this lower hid! on account of the angle at which it must strike it. The turret amidships—an iron cylinder, nine feet high and twenty feet in diameter, eight or nine inches thick throughout and about the port-holes eleven inches—revolved by steam power. When the two heavy Dahlgren guns were run in for loading, a kind of pendulum port fell over the holes in the turret. Her propeller, rudder, and even anchor, were hidden.
Digitized by LnOOQle
H.MS. VICT OKI A AT NEWCASTLE - ON ■ TYNE.
Digitized by GOOQle
62
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
It was now the turn of the Southerners to be puzzled. The Merrimac and the Monitor smelt up towards each other cautiously, neither seeming to know exactly what to make of her antagonist. Not a soul was to be seen on board either vessel. The first shot from the Monitor was fired when about 100 yards distant from the Merrimac, and her distance was afterwards reduced to fifty yards ; and at no time during the furious cannonading that ensued were the vessels more than 200 yards apart The scene was in plain view from Fortress Monroe, and in the main facts all the spectators agree. At first the fight was very furious and the guns of the Monitor were fired rapidly. She carried only two to her opponent’s eight, and received two or three shots for every one she gave: only these shots appeared to have absolutely no effect upon her. Finding she was much more formidable than she looked, the Merrimac attempted to run her down ; but her superior speed and quicker handling enabled her to dodge and turn rapidly. Once the Merrimac struck her nearly amidships, but only to find that she was as hard to run down as to shoot down. She spun round like a top ; and, getting her bearing, quickly sent another of her big shots into the Merrimac.
The officers of the Monitor were beginning now to handle her with confidence, and no longer fired at random. “ The fight,” said an eye-witness, " then assumed its most interesting aspect. The Monitor went round the Merrimac repeatedly, probing her sides, seeking for weak points, and reserving her firo with coolness, until she had the right spot and the right range, and made her experiments accordingly’. In this way the Merrimac received three shots. . . . . Neither of these three shots rebounded at all, but appeared to cut their way clear through iron and wood into the ship.” Soon after, receiving the third shot, the Merrimac had had enough, and made off at full speed ; nor was the contest renewed.
In a subsequent chapter we shall invite experts to trace for us the development of ironclad warfare since this memorable engagement in Hampton Roads: to explain what has actually been done, for instance, at Lissa and at Alexandria, and to forecast what will happen if ever two great European Powers should find themselves at strife upon the sea. They shall take us over a modern ironclad, explain to us the working of her machinery and her guns, and discourse of torpedoes, torpedo-catchers, submarine boats, and all the most modern appliances for attack and defence.
At present we are merely drawing comparisons between old and new, the wooden Victory and the iron Victoria. Having seen what the Victory actually did, we will now hear from the mouth of one who, possessing a vivid imagination as well as a thorough knowledge of his subject, has described the course and probable issue of a conflict between the Victoria and an ironclad worthy of her steel ; and having learnt what this noble ship might have done, we will then describe the terrible accident which in June, 1893, cut short her career
Digitized by
Google
THE CONNING TO WEIL
63
with all its possibilities, and sent her to the bottom with the Admiral whose flag she carried and 400 gallant seamen.
But first for a few particulars about her in addition to those already given. The Victoria (at first known as the Renown) was a steel-armoured turret-ship of 10,470 tons : her length was 340 ft,, her breadth 70 ft., and her mean draught of water 26 ft 9 in. Her indicated horse-power was 14,000; her speed 16'75 knots an hour.
She was built at Elswick, Newcastle-on-Tyne, by Sir W. G. Armstrong, Mitchell & Co. The order for the vessel was placed with this firm on April 23rd, 1885, and she was launched in 1887, in six months less time than had been allowed by the Admiralty. At this time she and her sister ship, the Sans Pareti, were the fastest armour-clads afloat in the British Navy, and were surpassed in speed by only two foreign armour-clads, the Italia and Lepanto, both of them Italian. In appearance she resembled the Rupert, Conqueror, and Hero, though she carried less side armour. Each of these ships has a single turret forward that carries the two big guns: and abaft the turret and above the upper deck there is a structure protected by armour from three to five inches thick, carrying the auxiliary armament This consisted of twelve six-inch five-ton guns, twelve six-pounder rapid-fire guns, nine three-pounder rapid-fire guns, six Nordenfeldt guns, and eight torpedo tubes.
At the forward extremity of the flying deck and immediately abaft the turret stands the conning tower. But what is this ? A small room scarce six feet across. But within these six feet is contained tho brain of the ship, the brain that works and fights her in action. Here in this spot, and in the hands of one man, her captain, is concentrated the whole power of that tremendous machine which we call an ironclad ship. Here to his hand stand ready steering-wheel, telegraphs, voice-pipes, and other means of communication with the engine-rooms, gun and torpedo stations, and all important points of the ship. But the description of this chamber and the forces it controls we will leave to Mr. H. O. Arnold-Forster, from whose “ In a Conning Tower ”• we have permission to quote the best-imagined account as yet written of a naval duel under modern conditions. The reader must first be informed that throughout the story H.M.S. Majestic is merely a pseudonym for H.M.S. Victoria.
"This,” says Mr. Arnold-Forster, “is the spot to which I wish to lead you. This is the conning tower of H.M.S. Majestic. A chamber scarce six feet across, encumbered as you sec with a score of appliances which diminish tho scanty space which it affords. Touch the wall in front of you—a formidable partition, is it not ? Twelve inches of solid steel and iron, and carried down far into the framework of the ship. Note too above your head a solid roof
• “ In a Conning Tower; or, How I Took H.M.S. Afejeuic into Action.” By M. 0. Arnold-Forster. London : Cassoll & Co., Ltd.
Digitized by
Google
64
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
of steeL This is the fighting position of the Majest ic. ‘ The fighting position,’ you will say, ‘but how con an action be conducted from a spot from which no enemy is visible ?' Stand here and bring your eye to the level of the armourplating, and mark the narrow slit between the arched cupola above us, and the steel walls of the chamber; sweep your eye round, and the whole horizon will come within your view. Look down, and in front of you is the sharp
Phtdo. Sir W. G. ArnutruHy, M delicti d' Co., Ltd.
A SHOT FROM H.M.8, VICTORIA
bow of the ship, and the two long white muzzles of the guns protruding many feet from the forward turret. Now look inside at the fittings of the conning tower, and read the inscriptions on the brass tablets which surround it. Over that group of speaking tubes on your right you see the words, ‘ Bow torpedo tube ’ and ‘ Above-water torpedo tube.’ On the left is the voice tube to the engine-room. That key completes the circuit which discharges the great guns.
“ Here in the centre is the steam steering-wheel, binnacle, and compass. ‘ All very trim and ship-shape,’ you will say, ‘ and an immense convenience to the commanding officer to have all the arrangements of me snip brought under his hand.’
“ Convenient, yes ■ but let your imagination come to the aid of your observation. Here lies the great ironclad, ‘ a painted ship upon a painted ocean; ’ but see her as I have seen her; think, if you can, of what is meant by the accumulation of forces within this little space, and try to realise, as clearly as any man who has not passed through the ordeal can realise, the strain upon
Digitized by GOOQle
“IN THE CONNING TOWER."
65
the human mind which is placed in absolute control of this mighty engine in the day of battle. ... ■
“ Here in the conning tower stands the captain of the ship, and beneath his feet lie hidden powers which the mind can hardly grasp, but which one and all arc made subservient to his will, and his will alone. Picture him as he stands at his post before the battle begins ; all is quiet enough, there is scarcely a sound save the lapping of the water against the smooth white sides
fh^o. by .\tr n <; AfmitTQM'j, M dcl"U d: C<-. Lid. FORECASTLE OF H.M.^ VICTORIA,
of the ironclad, and no outward sign of force save the ripple of the parted waters falling off on either side of the ram as it sheers through the water. But mark that white thread escaping from the steam-pipe astern, a fleecy vapour rising into the air and nothing more ' But what does it mean ? It means that far down below some thirty glowing furnaces are roaring under the blast of steam ; that in the great cylindrical boilers the water is bubbling, surging, struggling, as the fierce burning gases pass through the flues ; and that the prisoned steam, tearing and thrusting at the tough sides of the boilers, is already raising the valves and blowing oft' at a pressure of 100 pounds. It means that the captain in his conning tower has but to press the button by his side, and in a moment the four great engines will be driving the twin screws through the water with the force of 14,000 5
Digitized by LnOOQle
66
■ THE STOHY OF THE SEA,
horse-power, and that the great ship, with the dead weight of 10,000 tons, will be rushing onwards at a speed of over twenty miles an hour.
" In her turret and in her broadside batteries there is a deep hush of expectation; but there, too, waiting to respond to the ‘flash of the will that can,’ lie.forces of destruction which appal the imagination
L“ Far .down below our feet in the chambers of the great guns lie the dark masses of the powder charges. A touch, a spark, and in a sheet of flame and with the crash of thunder the steel shot will rush from their muzzles, speeding on their way 2,000 feet in a second, and dealing their blow with an impact of 60,000 foot-tons—5,000 pounds weight of metal, discharged by one touch of the captain’s hand. Nor is this all ; another touch and another signal will liberate the little clips which detain the four Whitehead torpedoes in their tubes. A puff of powder, a click, as the machinery is started and the two screws are set off whirling, and with a straight, silent plunge the long steel torpedoes will dive into the water, and at their appointed depth will speed on their way thirty miles an hour on their awful errand of destruction. Move that switch, and through the dark wall of the night a long straight beam will shoot forth with the radiance cf 40,000 candles, turning the night into day.
" A word spoken through that tube will let loose the hailstorm of steel and lead from the quick-firing and machine guns on the upper deck and in the tops. A discharge of shot and shell, not to be counted by tens or scores but by hundreds and thousands, a storm before which no living thing can stand, and under which all but the strongest defences will wither and melt away like a snow-bank under an April shower.
“ And last and most terrible of all, there is one other force ready to the captain’s hand : a force, the sum of all the others, and which, if rightly utilised, is as irresistible as the swelling of the ocean tide, or the hand of Death. By your side and under your hand are the spokes of the steam steering-wheel; far forward under the swirling wave, which rises round the ship’s cut-water, lies the ram, the most terrible, the most fatal, of all the engines of maritime warfare. It is the task of the hand which turns that little wheel to guide and to direct the fearful impact of the ram.
“ Think what the power confided to one man's hands must be; 10,000 tons of dead weight driven forward by the frantic energy of 14,000 horse-power, plunging and surging along through the yielding waves, at a speed of thirty feet in every second, and with a momentum so huge that the mathematical expression which purports to represent it to the mind conveys no idea to an intelligence incapable of appreciating a conception so vast. To receive a blow from the ram is death, the irretrievable catastrophe of a ship’s career. To deliver such a blow is certain victory'. It is with the captain, and with the captain alone, as he stands here in the conning tower, that the responsibility of inflicting or encountering this awful fate lies.” .
Digitized by LnOOQle
AN ENEMY IN SIGHT.
67
Mr. Arnold-Forster then gives us the narrative of the commander of such a vessel as the Majestic (or Victoria), despatched from Portsmouth in time of war with orders to join the Mediterranean Fleet. The Admiralty has neglected to provide him with cruisers, despatch-vessels, or torpedo-boats, to serve his heavy ironclad as eyes and keep him informed of any danger ahead: and in the Bay of Biscay he falls in with a man-of-war of the enemy.
“ It was at two o’clock,” says the narrator, “ that the look-out sighted a strange vessel hull down on the port bow. It was not long before the diminished distance between the two vessels revealed to us the three funnels and the raking masts of one of the enemy’s fast cruisers. A good glass enabled ns to detect two torpedo-boats steaming along under her quarter. I knew at once what our friend was about, and I longed for a swift companion whom I might despatch in pursuit ; but such good fortune was not to be. After making a careful inspection of us, the stranger went about, and, steaming at full speed, was soon beyond the horizon. To follow her was : nor would it have been consistent with my instructions hud I possessed the three extra knots which would have put me on an equality with her; but I was pretty sure, and the event proved that I was right, that she had not paid us her visit of inspection for nothing.
“During the whole of the following night we were steering west-south-west, and our object in keeping so far from the land bad been fid tilled, for we had sighted nothing but a homeward-bamd British steamer from Valparaiso, which hud made a clear run at an average rate of sixteen knots, and had not been molested by any enemy.
“It was just after seven bells in the morning watch that the look-out man on the top signalled a vessel hull down on the port ow. It was a fairly bright morning, and the distance, as far as we could calculate, between ourselves and the vessel in question about twelve miles.- - ................... .	.	-	• ■
" Whoever the stranger might prove to be, there was little nece for any extra precaution on board the Majestic. Throughout the n the water-tight doors had been closed ; all movable bulkheads unnecessary tit tings had long ago been removed and stowed. Every knew his station, and there was not the slightest occasion to hurry men over their breakfast ; the only difficulty was to keep them
their fighting stations, or from any point from which a view of the stranger could be obtained. In n very few minutes it became apparent that, whether friend or foe, the new-comer was heading directly for us. Our orders were not to seek an engagement; in this case it was evident that we should scarcely have an opportunity of refusing one, provided that we held our course, and that it was an enemy’s ship that was in sight.
Digitized byVrOOQlC
68
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
“We were not long in doubt upon this head. In less than ten minutes not only the form but the colours of the stranger became clearly apparent; and the colours were those which it was our duty at any cost to lower.* The ship itself was as familiar to me as the flag which she bore. In these days, when photography and an elaborate professional literature have recorded the form and peculiarity of every important ship-of-war afloat, it would have been strange had I not recognised the formidable lines of the antagonist with which we were so soon to be in conflict But my acquaintance with my adversary
“ A BE COS'D SHOT . . . SPREAD Kt IN AND DEATH ” (JJ. Rk
was a more intimate one than any which the study of books could have conferred. It was not three months since I had been on board of her. Nor was this all; not only did I know the ship, but I knew who was in command of her. Many a time had I met Captain C--------------- when he represented his country as Naval Attache in London. A more gallant officer, a more accomplished gentleman, never wore the uniform of the honourable service to which he belonged.
• We learnt subsequently that the ironclad had been attended by the cruiser and torpedo-boats which we had seen on the previous day. Her auxiliaries had remained in port to coal, with orders to follow at speed in a few hours. Happily on leaving port they had been picked up by H.M. ships Blenheim and Cotlack, which after a running fight of an hour and a half had sunk the torpedoboats and captured the cruiser.
Digitized by LnOOQle
OX THE VERGE OE THE FIGHT.
69
" I confess that when I first realised who was my opponent, a sensation of a ven' peculiar kind passed through my brain. On the one hand, feeling as I did perfect confidence in my ship and in my crew, and rejoicing, as every man in my position would have done, at this opportunity of performing the highest duty of my profession, I was gratified that my opponent was a man whose defeat must add a special lustre to the efforts of my crew if they should be successful. On the other hand, I felt, as I stood on the bridge as the two ships neared each other, that the conflict must inevitably be not
“his eve followed the line of bubbles” (1>L 7<x
merely between material appliances on either side, but between the brain Mid the heart of two men whose fortunes and whose reputations were equally at stake: and I knew that the great ship that was bearing down upon us was guided by a master-mind, which would be quick to seize an opportunity, ready to strike, and merciless to gain victory at any cost. It was to be a battle, no doubt, but it was also to be a duel, and a duel to the death.
“ In less than half an hour from first sighting the enemy the distance wtwoen us was reduced to a little over two miles. • («) The crew were at thrir quarters, the guns were loaded, the torpedoes were charged and ready for action, and the boilers were blowing oft" at their highest pressure ; for it
• The letters refer to the positions of the ships M shown in the diagram, p. 67.
Digitized by LnOOQle
70
THE STORY OF THE SEA,
had always been my fixed determination to fight an engagement at full speed. Up to this time I was standing close to the chart house on the upper bridge; [terhaps not the wisest place to have selected, but I was determined to avail myself as long as possible of the full power to sweep the horizon which my entry into my appointed station in the conning tower would so inevitably curtail It was hard at such a moment to believe that the peaceful aspect before us must be changed before we were many minutes older into a hideous tempest of fire and blood. Many of us on both sides had served our respective countries for many years, but there was not one of us to whom the circumstances of the approaching battle were not absolutely new and beyond experience. The ship was making 105 revolutions, and was running at a very high speed, over seventeen knots; but the only sound was the crash of the engines, as familiar to us as the very pulsation of our own hearts, and scarcely more noticed. By my side stood two of my subordinates, my gunnery and navigating officers, my signalman and one of his staff. The time for conversation had gone by ; we had said all that had to be said, but one more remark remained to be made.
"1 Captain Maitland,’ I said to the staff-commander, ‘ I shall not require your services; this will be a matter of tactics, and not of navigation; we may be in need of officers before the day is out. I must ask you to leave the bridge. I know you will regret it, but the interests of the service demand it’
“ The words were scarcely out of my mouth, and the officer had hardly left the ladder, when a tongue of flame shot forth from the forward barbette of the enemy, and it thick, eddying bank of white smoke rolled and tumbled over her bows, driven forward by the blast of the great gun. There was a pause, short enough indeed in our ordinary reckoning of time, but fully long enough for anxious and excited nerves to appreciate, ere the hostile message reached its destination. Suddenly, some twenty yards ahead of the Majestic, there rose into the air a vast column of water, and the eye, naturally following the direction of the shot, marked the great jets which sprang up far into the distance as the projectile ricocheted over the water.
“ The action had begun, and sooner than I had expected. The range was a long one—too long to my thinking—but evidently the enemy was not of the same opinion. The time had come when duty demanded that I should take my appointed station. I descended to the conning tower, followed by my subordinates. As I passed down the ladder I saw the men duly posted at their stations in the tops and on tho superstructure, in charge of the quick-firing guns. In the battery the larger quick-firing guns were loaded and ready. Nothing was wanted in that part of the preparations which my eye could reach, and I had the happy certainty that there was no detail in all the dark recesses of the ship which required vigilance and skill for its superintendence which had not been cared for by my officers
Digitized by Google
FIRST BLOOD,
71
“A strange thrill came over me as I entered the conning tower. No one can analyse the sensations of such a moment; but one feeling I recall with pleasure and gratitude. Whether it were due to the happy inheritance of that English temperament and those English traditions which will reveal themselves in the time of danger, even to those who have been least conscious of enjoying the advantages they confer, whether it were the overmastering interest of the situation itself, and the professional instinct which compelled me to regard the whole proceeding as a problem of absorbing interest, I cannot say; but of this I am certain, that from that moment the feeling of doubt and anxiety, which I must admit had been for many hours past one of the sensations of which my mind was most deeply conscious, passed away, and was replaced by a feeling of mental exaltation, and of keen and almost oppressive appreciation of the conditions of the fight. However, I had little time at the moment to consider my sensations, I at once requested Lieutenant Mannering to communicate my orders with regard to laying the two heavy guns in the forward turret, and a genera! instruction was passed to the guns in the battery to reserve their fire until special orders were received from me. By this time the ships were within 2,000 yartls of each other, the enemy about two points on our port bow. (b) Again I saw the bright flash spring from her sides, and in a moment it was followed by a shock which shook the Majestic from stem to stern. This time there was no error in the aim, and the steel shot had struck the ship on the thick plating abaft the turret. Subsequent examination showed a scar six inches deep; but the blow had been a slanting one, and the projectile flew off at an angle, and passed into the sea astern of us.
“The time had come to give as good as we got. We were not near enough as yet to allow of the guns being successfully laid by my direction, and I passed the word down to bring both the turret guns to bear upon the enemy, and to fire as soon as she came on the sights. With a roar and with a crash which shook the tower in which I stood, the monster guns spoke their first word in war. Neither in the conning tower nor on the upper deck could the result of the shot be seen, but the signalman in the top gave us the welcome news that one shot at any rate had gone home. The guns' crews immediately commenced reloading, and, looking through the slit of the tower, I watched with intense anxiety the course of the en?my. There was a discharge from her decks, and in an instant there burst forth in front of my face, in all appearance on the very bow of the Majestic, a sheet of flame, followed by a crack like the rending of the thundercloud. At the same moment, with a din such as I had never heard in such close proximity, the broken fragments of the bursting shell beat down upon deck, on turret, on conning tower. The destruction was instantaneous, and within a certain area it was complete. Stanchions, bollards, bulwarks—the deck itself—were ripped and torn like so much paper; but the solid face of the turret held
Digitized by GOOQle
72
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
its own with ease, and the muzzles of the guns, to my immense satisfaction, remained untouched.
“ A second shot was more disastrous, striking the battery about half-way down its length; it passed through the iron
“I WAS THE OXLY SVBTIVOb" (p. 76).
actually be brought to bear. But for this order the carnage
on the port side skin as through a gossamer, and bursting against the after bulkhead, spread ruin and death through the crowded space. Never had a single shot worked more havoc, never did men recover themselves under such a stress with such coolness and bravery as did the survivors in the battery of the Majestic. I had deep reason to congratulate myself upon the order which I had previously given, that the guns’ crews on the starboard side should go below until their guns could would have been
terribly increased. Meanwhile my gunners were not idle, and the great guns had again tried the thickness of the enemy’s sides, this time firing chilled shell, which proved by their detonation that they had found an obstacle.
“It was now the crisis of the battle, for I saw the enemy rapidly changing course, and, starboarding her helm, make a circuit which would soon bring her broad on our port beam. (e) Two courses were open to me: one was to hold on, to accept the encounter and run past at close quarters, exchanging
Digitized by
Google
“ HA RD-A-STARBOARD ! ”
73
fire on the beam; but a moment’s consideration convinced me that to do so would be to favour the manoeuvre which my adversary had commenced, and which I had anticipated from the outset. Once abaft my beam, his afterbarbette guns would be as serviceable for attack as his forward guns had already proved themselves to be. I was, unluckily, not in the same plight; my single stern gun was not of a calibre to engage singly- against such odds. At any cost I must keep my- turret bearing on the foe. The alternative course therefore alone remained open to me.
“ THE KAM MU ITS WORK ” (p. 78).
" I knew the turning circle of my ship to a yard, and in an instant I determined what to do.
“ The two ships were now in a blaze from stem to stern, the tops, the superstructure, and the batteries in sheets of flame ; my own fire, alas 1 diminished by the fatal shell which had played such havoc in my main battery.
“ Suddenly I saw that the time had come. The enemy was already heading in towards us, and in another moment his starboard guns would have opened upon us. Suddenly I gave the order ' Starboard, hard-a-starboard.’ Tire order was executed as soon as given, and the splendid ship, answering to the helm, came round with a swift, steady rush that made my heart leap for joy. We
Digitized by LnOOQle
74
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
were within three hundred yards, and with our starboard bow presented (d) to the enemy we rapidly approached to an even closer and more perilous range. The fire from the tops and superstructure had now slackened,' for we had realised with sorrowful certainty the truth which modern warfare has revealed to us, that no exposed crew can live under the close fire of machine-guns. The loss on either side had been terrific for so short an engagement, and mere physical inability to load and work the guns had for a time caused the fire to slacken. It was not my intention that the ship should complete the halfcircle, and suddenly porting the helm, I bore down diagonally on the starboard quarter of the enemy.
“It was at this moment that both my antagonist and myself resorted to another of the great weapons of destruction that had been confided to us, but which had not as yet been called into play. I had given a general instruction to the officers in charge of the torpedo-tubes to exercise their discretion in discharging their weapons as soon as I informed them that a suitable stage in the operations had been reached. I now gave the required signal, and it was at this moment, as I was subsequently informed, that the starboard Whitehead was discharged. Almost at the same instant one of the few observers left in the top, a midshipman who had found his way up there since the machine-gun fire had slackened, noted that a similar step had been taken by the enemy. I need hardly say that I was unable myself to observe either of the incidents which I have just related; the position of the conning tower, the thickness of the smoke, and, above all, ray intense preoccupation, prevented my appreciating the danger to which at that moment my ship was exposed. By a fortunate chance, however, an action of mine beyond all doubt averted the peril which I did not myself foresee. The discharge of the torpedoes on either side was evidently almost coincident with my sudden alteration of course.
“ The Majestic, which a few moments before had been almost broad on the enemy’s beam, had yielded to the pressure of the rudder and was already-heading obliquely towards the other ship, (e) Our own torpedo, running with an accuracy and speed which left nothing to be desired, passed close under the stern of our adversary-. The chance which diverted our attack proved also our protection.
“The midshipman marked the moment of the discharge of the enemy’s torpedo, and his eye followed the line of bubbles as it advanced with furious speed in the direction of the Majestic. Against the Whitehead torpedo once fairly launched against an unprotected ship there is no defence; the track of the terrible projectile is plainly visible to the eye, but no power can avert its course or parry the fatal blow. Seething and hissing, the torpedo came nearer; if the ship steadies on this course she must inevitably be struck; the hand which controls her is in the conning tower, and he who directs it is all unconscious of what depends upon the next movement of the little wheel in
Digitized by Goode
TORPEDOES AND THE RAM,
75
front of him. But the ship is not yet round, the slight pressure on the spokes is maintained, the steam steering-engine passes it on with its full power to the rudder, and the ship steadily swings up to starboard. It is a touch sod go: the hundredth part of a point less and the striker will come full against the bow of the ironclad, and the great problem of the value of the Whitehead torpedo in war will have been illustrated by a practical example which perhaps few of the ship’s company will live to study. But no! Hidden for a second under the curling swell above the ram, the hissing bubbles reappear, hastening away on our port bow, and this time, at any rate, the Majestic is saved.
"But to return to my own immediate part in the engagement. The ship, whose course had been in the shape of an S, was now completing her second half-circle, and the guns trained over the beam were still bearing upon the enemy as she steamed away from us. (/) Tlie starboard battery was remanned, and on both sides the firing was renewed with great vigour, though with a diminished accuracy which told that the loss of the leading men in the guns’ crews and the fierce stress of the fight had produced their natural consequences. Suddenly, amidst the din of the firing, and easily distinguishable above the thunder of the guns, came the report of a fierce, rapid explosion, followed by an instantaneous cessation of the enemy’s fire. It was impossible to see what had taken place, but the fact remained beyond doubt, and I instantly determined to avail myself of it. It had been my intention to have kept my course at right angles to the enemy for a time, so that I might steam out of torpedo range, and again take up an end-on position. But this idea was instantly abandoned. Once more the helm was put hard-a-port, and once more the Mujextic circled round on the further side of her adversary. 0) In a moment firing was renewed, and the enemy, to my surprise, came gradually round to port, as though about to cross my bows. It is a source of unfailing thankfulness to me to remember that at this crisis of the battle my mind was cool and collected, and my judgment perfectly clear. I turned to the lieutenant, and bade him transmit my orders through the ship. The orders were simple. ‘ Lay both guns ahead, full speed, and prepare to ram.’
“ I stood, with the steering-wheel in my hand, watching every movement of the enemy; for a freshening breeze now carried the smoke swiftly away. It was evident that something of serious importance had taken place; her speed was diminished, for the interval between the ships decreased much more rapidly than the lateral distance.
“ I was convinced that, for a time at any rate, my adversary had lost control over his ship. We were now separated by a distance of less than three hundred yards (A), and still the same apparent indecision marked the movement of the enemy, who was moving slowly with almost a full broadside presented to us, and somewhat on our starboard bow. Suddenly she appeared to gather full way, and her head began to come in slightly towards us. But
Digitized by Goode
76
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
it was too late; the time had coma I moved my hand and the officer by my side flashed my will to the great turret guns. On both sides there was a roar and a crash: the thunder of the tornado with the shock of the earthquake. So much I can recollect, but the next few moments remain a blank on my memory. I was stunned, but the loss of consciousness was only for a few instants. I recovered to find myself leaning against what had an instant before been the wall of the conning tower, but which now was but a fragment
of the wreck with which everything around me seemed overwhelmed.
Photo, by Ha mH <t Poe, Piccadilly.
ADMIHAL 8Ui O!O, TRYON.
" The view, which had hitherto been obscured by the low roof of the tower, was now open, for not only had the roof gone, but a huge piece of the solid wall of the tower itself had been caught by the impact of the great steel shot, and now lay in bent fragments and huge slabs on the iron deck below. Of the three who, a moment before, had stood together in the tower, I was the only survivor. My signalman, crushed and mangled by the debris of the armour, lay in front of me. By my side my lieutenant had sunk down dead, his breast pierced by a single fragment of the flying metal. I raised my hand to my eyes to brush away the mist which I felt gathering upon
them, and I found that my face was streaming with blood ; but while reason was left to me, it could only be concentrated on one thought and one object: that which lay before me.
“ Swept and shattered by the point-blank discharge of the terrible artillery to which she bad been exposed, the Majestic still held her course, and bear course was that on which I had launched her. On either side the last bolt was sped, the gun had had its final word; a greater power was now to give its decision, and from that decision there was no appeal.
“ Those who attach any value to the humdrum division of time and distance by the ordinary standards of arithmetic and the clock-face will doubtless be able to calculate for their own satisfaction that the period occupied in traversing two hundred and fifty yards at a speed of twenty miles an hour is to be reckoned in seconds only, and that the briefness of the allotted time gives no scope for the operations of the mind. Those who have ever stood in such a position as I stood in at that moment will laugh at these dogmatic calculations, and will know, as I know, that each
Digitized by GOOQle
•‘THE VICTORIA . . . TURNED OVER, AND SANK" (p. 87).
Digitized by GOOQle
78
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
second, and each portion of a second, is pregnant with its keen and separate consciousness.
“ The time, so heavily laden with the weight of the unknown result which it was about to produce, crept heavily along. But the end came at last. To the last moment, from the high deck and superstructure of the enemy, the fire from the machine-guns was maintained with a certain degree of energy. Our opponent lay between us and the southern sun, and I can at this moment remember the instant when the low bow of the Majestic entered the shadow she cast upon the water. Then with a deep, grinding, terrible crash, the ram did its work, (i) We had struck the enemy about fifty feet from her bow, and the slight change in her direction made the blow a slanting one.
“The Majestic shivered from stem to stern, and I could actually see the ironwork on the bow ripping and splintering as it forced its way into the opposing side. But it was not there that the fatal wound had been given. Far underneath the water-line the protruding ram had struck a blow from which no human power could save the victim. For a moment all was still, save for the sound of the stretching and rending of the iron; then suddenly, with a certain but steady heave, the great ship seemed to bow down towards us. I watched her for a moment: long enough to see the surface of the dock as it showed up with the heel of the ship, and then I knew no more. The strain was over, my work was done, and it was not till a month later that I opened my eyes in Haslar Hospital and came back once more to the land of the living. Little remains for me to tell, but you will ask how the two ships fared in the encounter. Of the condition of my adversary I can tell you but little, for no subsequent examination revealed the work of our guns. Within a quarter of an hour after the ram of the Majestic struck her, the last vestige of the splendid ship had sunk beneath the waves, her hull absolutely broken in two by the force of the collision. We had time to save some hundred and twenty of her crew,* and from them we learnt something of the effects of our cannonade. A projectile from our forward turret had struck one of a pair of barbette guns at four feet from the muzzle. The chase of the gun which was thus struck had been broken clean away, and the gun alongside of it had been so far dislodged from its slide that the loading gear had become unserviceable. The rapid discharges of the heavy quick-firing guns bad been most destructive, and it was to a hundred-pound shot from one of these that the catastrophe, to which in all probability we owed our victory, was due. Falling full upon the side of the ship in the neighbourhood of tho broadside torpedo discharge, the shot had carried a piece of the plate bodily inwards ; and had come in contact with the striker of tho Whitehead torpedo, just as it was about to leave the impulse tube. An explosion had instantly followed,
* With the greatest difficulty, for we hud not a single boat that would swim, so destructive had been the effect of the machine-gun fire.
Digitized by GOOQle
THE RAM DOES ITS WORK.
79
the report of which we had heard, but of whose effects we had no conception at the time. Seventy pounds of gun - cotton exploding between decks had created havoc which might well appal the bravest. Nor was this all. The blast of the explosion had driven a heavy piece of metal against the connections of the steam steering - gear, and for a moment all control over the movements of the ship had been lost. Before the fatal moment the ship was again in hand; but it was too late, and the sequel has already been told.
“One other fact we were able to discover. The last discharge from our turret guns, at three hundred yards, had gone home. One shot, piercing the armoured belt like paper, had cut a passage through the ship almost from stem to stern. The other, sinking the conning tower, had in an instant destroyed the gallant captain of the ship, together with all those who stood round him.
“On our side, with the exception of the final catastrophe, the results had been no less terrible. The central battery, torn as I have already pointed out by a heavy projectile, had been riddled through and through by smaller shell of every description. No less than ninety of our brave fellows had fallen in this part of the ship in a courageous attempt to keep up the fire of the broadside guns. In the tops and on the superstructure our losses were only limited by the number of men whom I had allowed to expose themselves in those dangerous positions. On the superstructure not one man in ten escaped without a casualty of some sort; but the thick walls of the turret had proved an adequate protection. With the exception of No. 1 of the starboard gun, who had been struck dead by a machine-gun bullet in the very act of aligning the sights, not a single man of either gun’s crew had been touched. But the outside of the turret showed the terrible nature of the attack to which it had been exposed. On the port side was a grazing dent ten inches in length, and scoring the round surface of the turret for a yard or more. A shell exploding on the glacis plate had broken away the iron in more than one place; while, more remarkable than all the other injuries, was the spot where a salute of five simultaneous or successive blows from the six-inch guns had struck the steel-faced plating within the space of a square yard.
“It was at this point that the armour had suffered most, and the accumulated force of the attack had shivered the metal, which, starred and cracked in every direction, had fallen down in heavy fragments eight inches thick upon the deck.
“Tiie last discharge of the heavy guns, which had well-nigh proved fatal to me, had struck the Muj&tie in two places. The first shot, passing through the thin plating at the bow like paper, had embedded itself deep in the forward bulkhead. The second shot, striking the crown of the conning tower, had carried away the iron roof and a large portion of the wall of the structure. Not a single shot was fired during the whole of the action from our after gum
Digitized by
Google
80 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
The blow of the ram which had annihilated our enemy had not seriously damaged the Majestic. The strain had shaken and dislocated the plating round the bow, but the consequent leakage was well kept in cheek by the collision bulkhead, and was mastered by the steam-pumps. But our loss in men, in protection, and in ammunition, was too grave to allow' of any alternative but a return into port, and the officer who succeeded me in command wisely decided upon adopting this course.
“ We returned to Portsmouth on the fifth day after leaving it. A single action, lasting less than thirty minutes, had decided the fate of two of the most powerful ships in the opposing navies.
THE SYRIAN COAST NEAR TRIPOLI-
“ As for myself, as I have told you, it was not till many days afterwards that I regained consciousness and learnt the facts which I have now recounted to you. During the weary period of my delirium I acted over and over again every scene in the drama in which I had been recently engaged. Nor when the light of reason returned did the preoccupation pass from my mind, but from that time to this, and from now till the end of my life, the great crisis of my existence has ever been, and must ever be, the terrible time that I spent in the day of battle in the conning tower of H.M.S. Majestic."
Such was the story imagined for tho Victoria. We have now to narrate the story of her actual fate; to tell how she received from a sister ship that fatal blow of the ram which Mr. Arnold-Forster depicts her as inflicting on. an enemy.
At about ten o’clock on Friday morning, 23rd June, 1893, a whisper began
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE LOSS OF THE VICTORIA.
81
to spread in the West-end that one of the finest ships of our Mediterranean Squadron had gone down, with terrible loss of life. The Admiralty had received the news from the Foreign Office soon after nine o'clock. By ten o'clock it was known in all the Sendee clubs. But it is a remarkable fact that rumours of the loss of a battle-ship were current in London five or six. hours earlier. Whence they sprang nobody could trace, nor could any confirmation be obtained at anv of the Government offices or the Royal Naval ports, though inquiries were made as early as six o’clock. The first known telegram came
11 THE MEN .	.	. WORKED WITH A WILL ” (JI. SG).
bom Her Majesty’s Consul at Tripoli, on the Syrian coast. It was followed, at about eleven o’clock, by a telegram from Rear-Admiral Markham, second in command of the Mediterranean Squadron. This telegram ran as follows:—-
“Regret to report whilst manoeuvring this afternoon off Tripoli Victoria and C'imperilown collided. Victoria sank fifteen minutes after in eighty fathoms, bottom upwards. The Cimperdoirn’n ram struck the Victoria before the turret-starboard. The following officers vere drowned :—
“Commander-in-Chief; Clerk Allen ; Lieutenant Munro; Chaplain Morris; Chief-Engineer Foreman ; Engineer Harding ; Assists nt-Engineer Deadman ; Assistant-Engineer Hatherley ; Assistant-Engineer Seaton; Gunner Howell; Boatswain Barnard; Carpenter Beal; Mid-'hipman Inglis ; Midshipman Grieve ; Midshipman Fawkes ; Midshipman Lanyon; Midshipman Henley; Midshipman Gambier ; Midshipman Scarlett; Naval-Cadet Stocks ; Assistant-Clerk 8w#ge; Fleet-Paymaster Bickord.
5
Digitized by LnOOQle
82
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
“ 255 saved. Will report their names by telegraph.
“Injury to Camperdown not yet fully ascertained, but so serious as to necessitate docking.
“ Proposed to send survivors to Malta.
“Await instructions.
“(Signed) Markham.”
The Commander-in-Chief whose death was thus announced was Vice-Admiral Sir George Tryon, an officer who had no superior either in experience or in the confidence of the Service. His career had been one long record of distinction, from the days when he served with the Naval Brigade in the trenches before Sevastopol till August, 1891, when he was appointed to the command of the Mediterranean station. He had never been known to make a tactical mistake, and his brother officers at home, when first they heard that his ship had gone down in open daylight and the calmest of weather, at first refused to believe. It was impossible, they said, that be should blunder. Unfortunately, the same belief was equally strong in the Mediterranean Fleet until within a few minutes of his death—so strong, indeed, that at bis order the whole Fleet set itself to perform an obvious impossibility, with scarcely7 a whisper of remonstrance.
At ten o’clock in the forenoon of Thursday, 22nd June, the Mediterranean Squadron (consisting of the ships Victoria, Camperdown, Nile, Dreadnought, Inflexible, Collingwood, Phaeton, Edinburgh, Sans Pared, Edgar, Ampkion, Fearless, Barham) left Bey rout for Tripoli, steaming in line abreast at about eight knots. This order of sailing was maintained until shortly after two in the afternoon, when Admiral Tryon summoned Captain Bourke of the Victoria and Staff-Command er Hawkins-Smith to his cabin and announced that he meant to form the Fleet in two columns line ahead, the two columns to be six cables (or 1,200 yards) apart, and “ disposed to port ”—that is to say, the Commander-in-Chief himself with the Victoria would lead the starboard column, and Rear-Ad mind Markham in the Camperdou n the port column. The arrangement may be shown thus :—
Camperdown.			A	Vie'or la.
Edinburgh.	A		A	Nile.
Sans Pared,	A		A	Dreadnought.
Edgar.	A	1,200 yards.	A	letter Me.
Ampkion.	A		A	Phaeton.
A Collingwood.
He further announced that ns soon as they were sufficiently well past the spot at which be proposed to anchor he should reverse their course by turning the lines inwards, and so bring the ships up to their anchorage.
We have seen that the two columns were six cable lengths, or 1,200 yards, apart. Now the smallest turning circle of the Victoria was three cable lengths, or GOO yards; and that of the Camperdown about the same. It would follow, therefore, that if these two ships circled in towards each other at a distance
Digitized by Go Jie
ADMIRAL TRYON’S ERROR.
83
of 1,200 yards their circles must, even under tlie most favourable circumstances, intersect—in other words, that a collision must result This very obvious reflection occurred at once to Staff-Commander Hawkins-Smith, who said, “ It will require at least eight cables for that, sir.” After a moment’s hesitation the Admiral answered, " Yes, it shall be eight cables.” The StaffCommander then left the cabin and went on deck.
As soon as he was gone the Admiral rang his bell, sent an orderly for the Flag-Lieutenant, Lord Gillford, and gave orders that the signal should be made to “form columns of divisions in line ahead, disposed abeam to port, column* to be six cables apart ”—thus committing the very error against which he had been warned a minute before. Moreover, that there should be no mistake in transmitting the order, he gave Lord Gill ford a piece of paper with the figure 6 written on it. Lord Gillford went on deck with the order, and the Admiral and Captain Bourke left the cabin and went out into the stern-walk.
But the fatal mistake was not to be made without a plenty, and more than a plenty, of warning. No sooner was the signal flying than the Staff-Commander noticed that it said “ six cables,” and nt once went aft and asked Lord Gill ford: “ Have you not made a mistake ? The Admiral said eight cables." “ No, I think not,” answered Lord Gillford, and showed him the piece of paper with the figure 6 upon it. “I think,” said the Staff-Commander, "you had better go down and make sure.” Lord Gillford went down accordingly, and found the Admiral sitting in the stern-walk with Captain Bourke. He gave the message, which Captain Bourke confirmed, saying, “You certainly said, sir, it was to be more than six cables.” " Leave it at six cables,” was the reply; and Lord Giliford returned on deck. And yet once more after be had gone Captain Bourke reminded the Admiral that the Victoria's turning circle was not less than 800 yards. This time the Admiral’s reply was sharply spoken: “That’s all right; leave it at six cables.”
At six cables’ distance, then, the two columns were steaming when, at half-past three, the following signal was made from the Victoria.:—
or,
2 flag,
2 pendant, Coinpass pendant, IS.
■ and
2 flag,
1 pendant,
16,
. Compass pendant,
Second division al tert course in succession I 16 points to star-1 board, preserving " the order of the Fleet,	,
and
First division alter course 16 points to port, preserving the order of the Fleet.
We must now leave the Victoria for a while and pass to the Camperdown,
Digitized by LnOOQle
84
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
case the Camperdown had nothing to
leading the port column. Flag-Lieutenant Bradshaw, of the Camperdown, read off the above signal, and reported it to Admiral Markham, who said: “ It is impossible; it is an impracticable manoeuvre ”; and ordered him to keep the signal, which was being repeated, at the top, ns an indication it was not understood. Admiral Markham then walked forward, and meeting Captain Johnstone, of the Camperdw'n, who had also been puzzled by the signal, said: “ It’s all right; don’t do anything. I have not answered the signal.” He then walked aft again, and ordered the flag-lieutenant to semaphore for more explicit instructions. But before this could be done there came another signal from the Commander-in-Chief to know what the Camperdown was waiting for; and Camperdown pennants were also hoisted on board the Victoria as a hint that she was delaying the manoeuvre. It was at this point, and just as he was about to insist that he did not understand the order, that a new interpretation of the signal flashed across Admiral Markham’s mind. This was that instead of inverting the lines together (in which case collision was certain), Admiral Tryon proposed to ease his own helm down and circle outside the port division, leaving it on his port hand, in which do but turn inwards sixteen points to
A- A. Thf art fin a J *Miti<ms of the fitter. B'B. Tn nr foyimm when -in c.dit .tian..
C- C- The foufijas vdtiJt J J. MarMattf tlwt^ht Str G. Tryjr.
inffnieti to fa he if-
starboard, as ordered. Admiral Markham, therefore, after a hurried consultation with his flag-lieutenant and Captain Johnstone (both of whom assented to this new reading of the proposed manoeuvre) hoisted the signal to say that he understood, put his helm hard-a-port, and the two ships began to turn.
The sea was smooth, with a light breeze. On board the Camperdown the group of officers waiter! watching the Victoria narrowly as she strung round, with their eyes on her helm signal, and expecting every moment to see that signal changed. But the signal was not changed. On board the Victoria the Commander-in-Chief was talking and joking with the StaffCommander. “ We shall be very close to that ship,” said Captain Bourke. The Admiral looked aft, but made no answer. “We had better do something, we shall be very close to the Campcrduwn." All this time the ship was turning; and still there was no answer. “May I go astern full speed with the port screw ? ” asked Captain Bourke. He had to repeat quickly before tho Admiral answered “ Yes.” The port telegraph was at once put full speed astern, and almost immediately starboard telegraph also. But it was too late. The Camperdown had already reversed her engines, though by some mistake they were only working at three-quarters speed astern. It made little difference, however; nothing could prevent collision now. About three and a half minutes after the ships began to turn, the Cawjvrdown’s ram struck the
Digitized by
Google
THE COLLISION.
85
Victoria on her starboard bow about twenty feet before the turret, and crashed into the ship almost to her centre line.
Meanwhile, as soon as the collision was imminent, orders had been given, "Close the water-tight doors” and “Out collision mats.” The doors were shut; but nothing could be done with the mats, for the bows at once began to sink steadily. As she was struck, the Victoria heeled very slightly to
BOATS RESCUING THE SURVIVORS OF THE VICTOBtA tp. 87).
starboard, and this heel, too, slowly but steadily increased. Captain Bourke had run below to see if all the doors were closed, and up to what bulkhead the ship hail filled. He went in the starboard fiats and saw the doors closed, and dso that the scuttles had been shut. He called round and asked if everything was tight. A voice answered him “Yes.” Ho then heard the order passed down for everyone to go on deck, and the men went up. The captain, however, made his way to the starboard engine-room, where he found the engines still being worked, and spoke to Mr. Deadman, engineer, who said that all his doors were closed, and that there was no water in the engine-room. Captain Bourke thereupon ran along the main passage to sec if the doors there were properly closed, and met the Fleet Engineer coming aft, who said
Digitized by Google
86
THE STORY OF THE SEA,
that all was tight (as far as he could tell) abaft the foremost boiler-room. Hearing tliis the captain made his way on deck, where he found the ship with an alarming list to starboard. The sick bad all been brought on deck, and the prisoners from the guard-room ; the only people below were the men still at work in the boiler-room and engine-room.
As soon as the ships cleared, Admiral Tryon asked the Staff-Commander his opinion as to the Victoria's keeping afloat. The Staff-Commander replied, " She ought to keep afloat some time, as she was struck so far forward ”; and asked, “ Shall we steer in for the land ?" The Admiral consented; but as soon as the quartermaster tried to right the helm he found that the hydraulic pressure was off, and the helm consequently immovable. Meanwhile the Admiral, seeing the Dreadnought's boats being lowered, gave orders for a general signal “ Annul sending boats ”; but semaphored “ Keep boats in readiness, but do not send them.” A minute before he had said to Lord Gillford, who stood beside him: “It is my fault, entirely my fault”; but neither he nor anybody had the slightest idea of the nearness of tho end. The men had fallen in on deck with absolute coolness and the most perfect order. In Captain Bourke's words: “ There was absolutely no panic, no shouting, no rushing aimlessly about. The officers went quietly to their stations. Everything was prepared, and the men were all in their positions for hoisting out the boats or performing any duty they may have been ordered to carry out. The men on the forecastle worked with a will until the water was up to their waists, and it was only when ordered aft that they left their work to fall in with the remainder of the ship's company. ... I can further testify to the men below in the engine-rooms. In the starboard one all were in their stations. The engineer officer was there, the artificer and stokers also. I am sure that those in the port engine-room and the boiler-rooms were equally true to themselves, to the country they were serving, and to the trust reposed in them. In all the details of this terrible accident one spot especially stands out, and that is the heroic conduct of those who to the end remained below, stolidly yet boldly, at their place of duty.” The behaviour of the men on deck was hardly less splendid They were first drawn up, four deep, with their backs to the ship’s side. A minute before tho end someone gave the order
“ Hight about turn.” This brought them with their faces to But though it only wanted two or three to start a panic, not broke the ranks to rush to the ship’s side. The voice of chaplain—the Rev. Samuel Morris—was heard saying, “Steady,
the bulwarks, a single man the Victoria'* men, steady.”
A braver man than the chaplain was not to be found on board, nor one more g<‘ii erally beloved.	•
It was about ten minutes after the collision that Admiral Tryon turned once more to the Staft-Commander and said, “I think she is going.” “Yes,
sir, I think she is.” The Admiral turned round to give the order to make the signal “Send boats immediately." In tho act of turning he saw one of
Digitized by Google
THE SHIP GOES DOWN.
87
the midshipmen standing close by, and said to him kindly: “Don’t stop there, youngster; go to a boat.” These were his last words. As he said them the Victoria gave a heavy' lurch to starboard, turned over, and sank.
At this last moment, and not till then, the order was given for the men to jump, and they rushed to the side and flimg themselves overboard ; but many, as the ship turned turtle, found themselves precipitated backwards and head first down the side they' had been descending feet first but a moment before. A midshipman on board one of the other ships of the Fleet de ■ scribes the scene as follows in a letter home, which was afterwards published in the Times:—
“Now comes the part which I hope never to witness again. At the time of the collision I was down below dozing, when someone said, ‘Wake up, old chap; the Victoria’s rammed.’ I hardly believed it, but on rushing up on deck I saw the Victoria slowly steaming ahead, with her bows gradually sinking below the water. We could see from our poop the whole thing. The Victoria’s men worked beautifully. Never, I should think, was such perfect discipline ever seen in such a trying time. We could see them evidently trying to get the collision-mat over the tremendous rent To our great surprise they made the signal, ‘Negative send boats.’ However, we carried on, getting all our boats ready, although we presumed their water-tight doors were closed and they were probably all right They then made the signal ‘Open,’ and began to slowly steam ahead and run ashore. No sooner had she begun to do this than her bows commenced sinking very rapidly. She then heeled over to such an extent that the port screw was above the water. Then, and not till then, wo could see all the men jumping overboard. She continued heeling over, and it was simply agonising to watch the wretched men struggling out of the ports over the ship’s bottom in masses. All this of course happened in less time than it takes to write. You could see the poor men who, in their hurry to jump over, jumped on to the screw, being cut to pieces as it revolved. She heeled right over, the water rushing in through her funnels. A great explosion of steam rose; she turned right over, and you could see all the men eagerly endeavouring to crawl over her bottom, when with a plunge she went down bows first. We could see her stern rise right out of the water and plunge down, the screws still revolving. It was simply a dreadful sight. We could not realise it. Personally, I was away in iny boat, pulling as hard as we could to the scene of the disaster. We Here a good way oft’ and by the time I got there, king the first of our boats, all the people had been saved by the boats of the ships which "were nearer. After pulling up and down for two hours we reorganised the Fleet, leaving two ships on the scene of the disaster; and, making for Tripoli, anchored for the night. No one can realise the dreadful nature of the accident However, dropping the Victoria for a minute, we must turn to the Camperdvwn. She appeared to be in a very bad way. Her bow was
Digitized by Goode
88
THE STOHY OF THE SEA.
sinking gradually, and I must say at the time I thought it quite on the cards that she might be lost also, but thanks to the indomitable way in which the crew worked they managed to check the inrush by means of the collisionmat and watertight doors. All last night, however, they were working hard to keep her afloat. You can imagine our feelings—the flagship sunk with
THE VICTORIA COVET-MAUI I AL : EXAMINATION OF CAPTAIN BCVHXK (p 89).
nearly all hands, the other flagship anchored in a sinking condition. We have a lot of the survivors of the Vu’torvi on board, but their accounts vary greatly. Some say the watertight doors were closed, but immediately the ship went ahead they must have burst open. Anyhow, what is quite certain is that the Admiral did not realise the gravity of his situation, or else they would have abandoned the ship at once, instead of trying to save her. The discipline was splendid. Not until the order was given did a single man jump overboard. The last thing that was seen was the Admiral refusing to try
Digitized by
Google
THE LIMITS OF OBEDIENCE.
89
to save himself, whilst his coxswain was entreating him to go. Another instance of pluck was exhibited by the boatswain of signals, who was making a general semaphore until the water washed him away. Unfortunately the poor chap was drowned. Many of the survivors are in a dreadful state of mental prostration. Most people say that Admiral Markham should have refused to obey the signal, but I think that Admiral Tryon infused so much awe in most of the captains of the Fleet that few would have disobeyed him. However, he stuck to his ship to the last, and went down in her.”
The concluding reflections of this young writer touch the question that vexes every thoughtful citizen in this matter of the Victoria. The court martial, which was opened at Malta on the 17th of July, concluded its labours on the 27th, when it acquitted Captain Bourke of all blame in the loss of his ship, and found, "with the deepest sorrow and regret,” that the collision was due to an order given by the Commander-in-Chief, the late Vice-Admiral Sir George Tryon, to turn the two divisions of the Fleet sixteen points inwards, when the columns were only six cables apart. But the question suggested by the loss of this splendid ship is really, What are the limits of a thinking man's obedience to the orders of his superior ? And can it be right for a company of officers to attempt a manecuvre which everyone knows to be impossible and calamitous, simply because their Commander has ordered it ? By the grimmest irony of fate, it so happens that Admiral Tryon had himself gone far to answer this question, in a memorandum issued to the Fleet a few’ months before. It ran as follows:—
“ Memo., January 1st, 1893.
"It may frequently happen that an order may be given to an officer which, from circumstances not known to the person who gave it, at the time he Issued it, it would be impossible to execute, or the difficulties or risks of the execution of which would bo so great as to amount to a moral impossibility. (Duke of Wellington’s G. 0., November 11 th, 1803.)
“1. While an order should be implicitly obeyed, still, circumstances may change, and conditions may widely vary from those known, or even from those that presented themselves at the time orders were issued. In such eases the officer receiving orders, guided by the object which he knows his Chief has in new, must act on his own responsibility.
“ 2. («.) Orders directing the movement of ships, either collectively or singly, are invariably accompanied, as a matter of course, with the paramount understood condition, with due regard to the safety of Her Majesty’s ships.
“(6.) When the literal obedience to any order, however given, would entail a collision with a friend, or endanger a ship by running on shore, or any other way, paramount orders direct that the danger is to be avoided, while the object of the order should be attained, if possible.
“ 3. An Admiral, leading a fleet, relies with confidence that, while the order
Digitized by LxOOQle
90
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
of the fleet is maintained, each ship will be handled and piloted with all tho care and attention that is exercised in 'the guidance of the leading ship. He relies that this will be the case, more especially when a fleet is approaching land, or a harbour.
“4. Risks that are not only justifiable, but demanded, during war, are not justifiable during peace.”
The memorandum, after giving one or two further instructions, winds up with the axiom, that, “ The neighbourly duties of ships in a fleet to each other are duties which must be kept constantly in mind.”
Digitized by LnOOQle
CHAPTER IV.
THE LIGHTHOUSE.
The Eddystone Reef-Henry Winstanley and his Eccentricities—The First Eddystone Light—Tho Great Storm of 1703—The Structure swept away with its Inventor—Another Silk-Moreer comes forward— Rudyerd's Lighthouse—Alone with a Corpse—A Taciturn Party—Rudyerd’a Tower Destroyed by Fire —A Mouthful of Lead—Loss of the ll’iiicheliea — John Smeaton—His Youth—Visits the Eddystone—. Early Difficulties—Resolves on a Stone Tower—Employment of “ Dore-tailing ” in Masonry—Tho Work Begun—A False Step—Smeaton on Plymouth Hoe—" Laus Deo ’’—The Rock ut length Undermined below Smeaton’s Tower—Douglass’s new Lighthouse—The Bell Rock—John Hannin and Robert Stevenson—Thirty-two Men in Deadly Peril—Alan Stevenson and tho SkciTyvore—Novel Barracks— Life on the Skerryvore—Other Lighthouses—Ships’ Lights ut Sea—The Rule of tho Road—The Orient and the Lout it Dagmar.
BETWEEN the two Lizard lights and the two lights upon Start Point the coast takes a long and inward curve, and in this curve lie Falmouth, Fowey, the Looes, and Plymouth Sound and Harbour. Vessels bound further up Channel do not, of course, follow this curve, but the arc of it; shaping their course direct from the Lizard to the Start. Full in their fairway, and about fourteen miles S.W. of Plymouth, a ledge of rocks rises from the bottom of the channel At low water their teeth can be seen above the waves; as the tide rises the ridges are hidden, and the spot could only be known by the broken water around it, were it not for that something which now shows like a glittering speck of white on our starboard bow. As we draw nearer the white speck takes the form of a column ringed with red and white; and as the sun drops the great lantern, 133 feet above high water, sends forth the first long ray of its revolving light, visible for eighteen miles and more.
This is the famous Eddystone, and the history of it is at once the most romantic and the most important of the many lighthouses round the const. The origin of lighthouses is remote enough. The first idea of one is, no doubt, as Faraday said, “ the candle in the cottage window, guiding the husband across the water or the trackless moor.” The most notable lighthouse in the world, if not the earliest, was that erected on the little island of Pharos to guide ships into the harbour of Alexandria. It was begun by the first Ptolemy, and finished about 280 n.c.—a square tower of white stone, about 400 feet high. Josephus states that the light, which was always kept burning on its top at night, was visible for over forty miles. Though the date of its destruction is
Digitized by Google
92
THE STOHY OF THE SEA.
unknown, and the cause by conjecture only set down to an earthquake, this tower is said to have lasted sixteen hundred years, and to-day the French, Italians, and Spaniards use its name for all lighthouses (French, pkare; Italian and Spanish, faro). The oldest existing is that at Corunna in Spain, said to have been erected in the reign of Trajan; but the remains of several Roman lighthouses may still be found in England. The ruins of one stand on St. Catherine’s Down, in the Isle of Wight; of another near the ancient church of Dover Castle; while at
V IN « TANL X Y*S LIGHTHOUSE. (Fruw a cnMtemnorarw JVt«4)
Boulogne opposite are the vestiges of a Pharos supposed to have been built by Caligula.
But though lights on shore have always been common enough, it was a very different thing to erect one on such a reef as the Eddystone. A lighthouse on shore has wind, rain, and frost to contend with: a lighthouse on a submerged reef has all these, and the worst fury of all, that of the waves; and the amount of that fury is hardly comprehended by the lay imagination. At the Skerryvore Rock they have an apparatus for registering the force of the waves per square foot surface ; it has registered as much as three tons to the foot
Now for the history of the Eddystone. Eying as it does full in the fairway towards the port and arsenal of Plymouth, and
in the fairway, too, of vessels sailing in and out of the crowded Channel, it had wrecked innumerable ships from the time when England, first began to trade upon the seas until the year 1696, when a man came forward to cope with the task which was believed impossible.
Digitized by LnOOQle
MR, WINSTANLEY’S ECCENTRICITIES.
93
In 1696 Mr. Henty Winstanley (a mercer and country gentleman) of Littlebury, in Esses, obtained leave
to erect on the Apart audacity
a Lighthouse Eddystone.
from of the
dertaking, there reasons, which in must have been
the un-
were 1696 con-
sidered very excellent ones, for thinking this gentleman mad. His curious mechanical genius first displayed itself in making his
nianor-
“ THR SEAS HAD SWALLOWED IT *’ (p. 01).
bouse in Essex an extremely uncomfortable place to spend the night in. On being shown into the guest-chamber you found an old slipper lying in the middle of the floor. You
kicked it carelessly aside, and immediately a white ghost, with sheet and lantern eyes,
rose from the boards and gibbered at you.
You sank affrighted into an arm-chair, from the back of which two arms
suddenly disengaged themselves and clasped you round the neck. Breaking loose, you dashed downstairs through the open door and out into the garden, to drop into a rustic seat, which at once rose with you into the air, floated over the hedge, and deposited you into an artificial lake on the far side. Winstanley also exercised his genius in constructing a group of curious fountains in Hyde Park, which were known as Winstanley's water-works, and exhibited to the cockneys at a shilling a head. By such devices he whiled away his leisure and alienated his friends, until the idea of erecting a lighthouse turned his invention to a worthier purpose. But even now the whimsicality of the man was translated into the wooden structure erected on the Eddystone Rock. It was more like a Chinese pagoda than a lighthouse. It began in a workmanlike manner with a circular tower; but was finished off with cranes
and chains, open galleries, a weathercock, and other fantastic projections. The main gallery, under the light, was so wide and open that an old gentleman, who remembered both Winstanley and his lighthouse, afterwards told Smeaton
Digitized by LnOOQle
94
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
that it was’ possible for a six-oared boat to be lifted up on a wave and driven clear through the open gallery into the sea on the far side. In the perspective print of the lighthouse, published after its erection (sec p. 92), the architect represented himself as fishing out of the kitchen window.
The work was begun in 1696, and finished in four years. The first summer was spent in driving twelve holes in the rock and fixing a bar of iron in each to hold the superstructure fast. The work, of course, could only be carried out during the summer months, and even then it was often not easy to find a landing, the reason being that the reef points to the north-east and spreads its inclined sides in a gradual slope to the roll of the Channel seas; and as this shelving direction is continued for many fathoms below the surface a ground swell is caused that agitates the Eddystone even when the sea around is perfectly calm.
The second summer was spent in building a solid pillar, twelve feet high and fourteen feet in diameter. In the third year the work went on more briskly, and was carried to a height of eighty feet In the midsummer of this year Winstanley made bold to take up bis lodging in the lighthouse with his workmen ; but a storm arose, and not only came near to drowning them, but spoilt their provisions and prevented the landing of fresh supplies until the party was reduced almost to its last crust. The building stood firm, however, and the light was exhibited for the first time on November 14th, 1698.
From the look of it, one marvels that the building stood as long as it did; which was some five years. Winstanley, however, was so well satisfied with it as to express a wish that he might be there in the fiercest storm that ever blew. His wish was gratified.
In November, 1703, it w'as found that the fabric wanted some repairs, and Winstanley travelled down to Plymouth to superintend them. On the 25th of that month, while he was still in the place with the light-keepers, began the most terrific storm known in English history—a storm in which the total loss of tile amounted to 8,000 souls. Defoe states that 150 sea-going vessels were lost in this gale; but this is probably a very low estimate. In the Downs alone above forty merchant ships were cast away and sunk. It blew its hardest on the night of the 26th; and when day broke on the morning of the 27th, and the men of Plymouth looked out towards the Eddystone, no lighthouse was to be seen: the seas had swallowed it, with its architect. When the waves abated and the rock w’as inspected, nothing was found standing but the huge irons that had held the building to the rock ; of the building itself there remained nothing but a bit of chain, so fast jammed into a crevice of the reef that it could never be disengaged until cut out in 1756. There is a tradition that at the same time the lighthouse disappeared, the model of it in Winstanley’s house in Essex tumbled down and was shattered in pieces.
Soon after this, for lack of a lighthouse, the WincAe/mt, a richly-laden homeward-bound Virginian, was wrecked on the Eddystone, with the loss of
Digitized by GOOQle
RUDYERD'S LIGHTHOUSE.
95
almost every soul on board. The warning was not neglected, and in three years’ time a new lighthouse was begun.
A certain Captain Lovet, having leased the rock from the Brethren of the Trinity House, engaged as his architect one John Rudyerd, also a London mercer, who kept a shop on Ludgate Hill. Little is known of this man, who was the son of a Cornish labourer of little repute; in fact, of ail his family we only know that they were accounted “ a worthless set of ragged beggars ” in the neighbourhood of their home. John, however, ran away at an early age, and took service with a gentleman at Plymouth, and we hear no more of him until we find
him called from his mercer’s shop in London to undertake the rebuilding of the Eddystone lighthouse.
Whatever may have been the reasons of Captain Lovet’s choice, they were justified. Rud-yerd's design was simple, but masterly. Instead of a polygon, he chose a cone for the outline of his building, this being the form that offered the least resistance to
HL'DYKRD'b LIGHTHOUSE.
(After u Drawing ly Iwuc Salluufl'cr.)
the force of the waves. The substructure, sixty-three feet in height, was of timber combined with courses of Cornish granite: first tiro courses of timber, then five courses of granite, then two more of timber and so on, the whole being secured with iron cramps. Outside these courses strong upright timbers were fixed, and carried up as the work proceeded; and within these outside timbers, scarfed—that is, the ends overlapping and firmly fastened together—Rudyerd placed his superstructure, four storeys of timber capped by an octagonal lantern. The total height was ninety-two feet, anti the whole building was an admirable piece of ship-carpen try, the granite being merely introduced, as it were, by way of ballast. Rudyerd finished his work in 1709, and for nearly fifty years it stood to warn vessels off the Eddystone.
The lighthouse was at first attended by only two men. The accident which led to three being employed is almost exactly that related by Alphonse
Digitized by^OOQlC
96
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
Dau det in liis account of tho “ Phare des Sanguinaires.” During his stay and on that wild spot on the Corsican coast he heard (as he tells) the following story from one of the lighthouse-keepers, old Bartoli by name.
“ I’ll tell you, sir, what happened to me ”—so the tale went—11 what happened to me five years since, at this very table, one winter night, same as this might be. That evening there were only two of us in the lighthouse, I and a mate they called Tcheco. The others were on shore on sick leave or something of the sort. We were finishing dinner, quietly enough. All of a sudden my mate stops eating, looks at me a moment, queerish like, and flop he tumbles across the table, with his arms stretched out. Forth I run to him, of course, gives him a shake, and calls to him, ‘Hi, mate, wake up there.’’ Not a word; he was stone dead! You can fancy my feelings. I stood there more than an hour, stupid and shaking in front of his body; then suddenly it came into my mind that the light wasn’t lit. I had only just time to climb into the lantern and light up. It was night by this. And such a night, sir' The sea and the wind, they didn't sound natural. Every moment it seemed to me someone was calling me out there on the staircase. I was fever hot, and the thirst on me—but you couldn’t have got me down those stairs. I was too badly frightened of the dead , man for that All the same, about daybreak I plucked up a bit. I lifted my mate on to his bed, put a cloth over him, managed a bit of a prayer, and then ran off to hoist the distress signals.
“ As bad luck would have it, there was too heavy a sea running. Call as I might, nobody was coming. There I was, stuck all alone in the lighthouse with my poor mate, and God knew for how long. I hoped to be able to keep him till the boat arrived; but at the end of three days I saw it wasn’t possible. What was I to do ? Cany him out and bury him ? The rock was too hard to dig; and you see what swarms of crows there are about the island. I couldn’t bear to leave him to them; ’twasn’t treatment for a Christian. Then I thought of lowering him into one of the cellars of the tumble-down lazar-house yonder, across tho island. That took me a whole afternoon, and a tough job it was, and a sad one. I tell you, it took some courage, too. Why, sir, till this day, if ever I go down to that side of the island, it always seems to me as if I’d got my poor mate’s body across my shoulders.”
This is pretty much the story of what happened in Rudyerd’s lighthouse; only in that case the survivor, fearing ho might bo accused of foul play, actually managed to keep the body until the boat from shore relieved him. From that time forward the third man was employed; and this allowed each to take a holiday occasionally and spend a month ashore among his friends. One very curious effect of their way of life was that, instead of developing a sense of comradeship, they fell into the gloomiest taciturnity, and often would hardly speak a word to each other for a month on end.
Digitized by LnOOQle
"WERE RESCUED. MORE DEAD TRAX ALIVE" (p. 98).
7
Digitized by LnOOQle
98
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
On tho morning of the 1st of December, 1755, the boat from Plymouth visited the rock and landed stores ns usual. The light-keepers reported all well, except that a recent storm had loosened one or two bricks in the kitchen fireplace.
At about two o’clock in the morning of the 2nd, the light-keeper on duty entered the lantern as usual to snuff the candles, and found the whole place in a smoke. To let the smoke out he flung open the door leading to the balcony, and immediately the whole cupola burst into a blaze. He shouted at once to his comrades; but they had no appliances beyond a few leathern buckets, and, to get water, they had to descend seventy feet and reascend the steep stairs before tossing what was left unspilt upon the flames. To make matters worse, the molten lead began to pour down upon them from the roof, and they fled from room to room, the fire following them down towards the sea. The glare upon the Eddystone had already been perceived at Cawsand and Rame Head, and fishing-boats pushed off at once for the rock, though a fresh easterly breeze was blowing. By the lime they reached it, the lightkeepers had not only been driven from all the rooms, but, to escape the molten lead and red hot bolts and falling timbers, had taken shelter under a ledge of the rock on its eastern side, whence they were rescued, more dead than alive, with greatest difficulty. One of them, Hall by name, was terribly scalded about the head and shoulders, and insisted (though nobody believed him) that a quantity of lead hod fallen into his mouth, passed down his throat, and settled in his stomach. He was sent to his home at Stonehouse, wHerc the doctors who visited him declared his story to be impossible, and began to think that sheer fright had made him a monomaniac. Hall, however, grew rapidly worse, and died within the fortnight in terrible agonies. A postmortem examination proved that he had spoken the truth after all; for in the stomach was found a flat oval-shaped piece of lead, seven ounces and five drachms in weight
Thus perished a second Eddystone lighthouse; but a very few months passed before a third was rising in its place. Captain Lovct, the former lessee of the lighthouse, was dead, and his interest had been acquired by a Mr, Robert "Weston and two others. Weston at once cast about for a new architect, and his choice fell on John Smeaton, a young Yorkshircman, an inventor of mathematical instruments, and a promising engineer. The Trinity House has been fortunate in its servants, and a streak of genius has lain in all our great lighthouse-builders, Winstanley, Rennie, and the two Stevensons; but it never had a happier inspiration than when it chose Smeaton. At the Leeds Grammar School this queer Yorkshire boy had been known as “ Fooly Smeaton.” He cared nothing for the games of the other boys, but would spend hour after hour in watching a group of masons or carpenters at work, and asking them questions. His life-long friend, Mr. Holmes, tells many stories of his boyish inventions. At one time it was a windmill fixed on the top of his father’s
Digitized by GOOQle
1
JOHN SMEATON.
99
barn: at another, a pumping-engine, which he set to work on his father's fish-ponds, killing all the fish and exasperating his parent considerably. Smeaton senior had destined him for the law, but at last gave way, and allowed him to go up to London, where, at the age of twenty-six, we find him reading papers before the Royal St ety, and already credited with an invention for marking the “way” on a ship at sea, several improvements in the air-pump, in ships’ tackle, and in water and windmills, and an attempted improvement in the mariner’s compass. At the age of thirty-two came the grand opportunity of his life, the offer to rebuild the Eddystone. Weston's letter concluded with the words, “ Thou
art the man to do it.”
“ Nothing but wood can possibly stand on the Eddystone,” said the Brethren of the Trinity House. “Not so,” answered Smeaton; “ the former buildings have lacked weight.” Smeaton had his way. He posted down to Plymouth in March, 1750, and so bad were the roads that the journey from London took him six days. At Plymouth he called on Josias Jessop, a foreman of shipwrights in the dockyard, to whom he had been referred for information about the previous lighthouse. Smeaton was burning to go out and see the rocks at once: but the sea was so heavy that no opportunity occurred until April 2nd, when he was able to reach them. The
JOHN SMBATON.
(^Wcr thf Fainting by Muther Unnen.)
sea was breaking with such violence that there was no possibility of landing; nil he could do was to view the cone of bare rock. Three days lator he managed to set foot on the reef, and stayed there more than two hours, when the sea again drove them off. Several succeeding trips were made to no purpose; but on the 22nd Smeaton managed to effect his second landing at low water. The party stayed until driven off by the rising water, when they retreated to their sloop, which lay off till the tide had fallen, when Smeaton again landed, and the night being perfectly still, he says, “ I went on with my business until nine in the evening, having worked an hour by candle-light.” Next day ho landed again, and was only driven off by a ground swell and a rising wind that forced the sloop to put back in haste for Plymouth.
Having surveyed the rock, Smeaton posted back to town, made his report, and was authorised to proceed with his design. He borrowed Rudyerd’s conception of a conical building, but proposed to enlarge the diameter
Digitized by
Google
100
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
THE SMEATON LLOHTHOtSE ON VETMOUTH HOE.
considerably. The type which he kept before him was that of an oak tree, which the storm neither bends nor breaks. He also devised a system of dovetailing then scarcely known in masonry, though common enough in carpentry: and, whereas his predecessors had lost much time in the journeys from Plymouth and back, he proposed to moor a vessel within a quarter of a mile from the rock, large enough to accommodate his workmen, who might use every favourable moment.
Smeaton fixed his centre and laid down his lines on the afternoon of the
3rd of August, 1756, less than a year after the fire. The rest of the summer was spent in bringing his materials to the rock, shaping them, and cutting out the dovetail recesses for the foundation-stones. The work was finished at the close of November, and the Neptune, his store-ship, weighed anchor to return to Plymouth. A gale was blowing, and, finding they could not make Plymouth Harbour, they headed the Neptune for Fowey, a short way down the coast. The wind rose higher as darkness fell, and in the night a sudden alarm brought Smeaton upon deck in his shirt. It was raining hard and blowing a hurricane. “ The first thing I saw was the horrible appearance of breakers almost surrounding us; John Bowden, one of the seamen, crying out, ‘ For God’s sake, heave hard at that rope if you mean to save your lives!' I immediately laid hold of the rope at which he himself was hauling, as well as the other seamen, though he was managing the helm. I not only hauled with all my strength, but called to and encouraged the workmen to do the same thing.” Their sails were carried away, or split in ribbons, while they heard distinctly the roaring of the surf on the rocks hard by, though nothing of the coast could be seen; but the vessel answered her helm, and they staggered off to sea again. At daybreak they were out of sight of land, and driving for the Bay of Biscay. Wearing ship, they stood once more for the coast, and before night sighted the Land’s End. Nor was it until after having been blown to sea for four days that they came to anchor in Plymouth Sound.
Digitized by^OOQlC
THE BUILDING OF SMEATON'S TOWER.
101
Next summer the building began. The first stone, in weight two tons and a quarter, was laid on the 12th of June, and by the evening of the following day the first course of four stones was finished The reason of this small number of stones was, of course, the slope of the rock, which of itself afforded the greater part of the foundation. The second course, of thirteen blocks, was laid by the 30th, the third, of twenty-five blocks, by the 11th of July; the fourth, of thirty-three blocks, by the 31st. On the 11th of August
THE PRESENT EDDYSTONE MGHTHOVSE.
the sixth course, bringing the structure above high-water mark, was completed. That evening, as the men were just about to lay the centre stone of the seventh course, and Smeaton was strolling to and fro on the level platform his
Digitized by
Google
102
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
ingenuity had raised above the waves, he made a false step, and fell from the brink of the masonry down among the rocks on the west side. The tide being low, he soon scrambled up again. He had dislocated his thumb, however; but this, as no surgeon was near, he reset himself, with a violent pull, and then quietly returned to his work of fixing the centre stone of the building. The year's work ended with the laying of the ninth course, on the 30th of September.
The following winter was a stormy one. It was the 12th of May, 1758, before Smeaton and his workmen returned to the rock, and, to their delight, found the work had softened nothing from the gales. The cement (brought in cider casks from Watchet) had become as hard as the stone itself, and the foundations seemed as strong as the rock on which they stood. The work now went on apace, and the twenty-ninth course was laid before the end of the season. Day after day, while he lived at Plymouth, Smeaton used to come out upon the Hoe with his telescope, and, from the place where the Armada was first sighted, peer out towards the Eddystone. “ There were still many who persisted in asserting that no building erected of stone could possibly stand on the Eddystone; and again and again the engineer, in the dim grey of the morning, would come out and peer through his telescope at his deep-sea lamppost. Sometimes he had to wait long until he could see a tall, white pillar of spray shoot up into the air. Thank God I it was safe. Then, as the light grew, he could discern his building, temporary house and all, still standing firm amidst the waters; and, thus far satisfied, he could proceed to his workshops, his mind relieved for the day."
Preparations for setting up a temporary light were almost completed when, on October the 10th, a quarrel between the Trinity Board and the lessee of the rock interrupted the work. The quarrel was not patched up until well into the following year; but on July the 5th the work was started again. On the 17th of August the forty-sixth, and last, course was laid, bringing the column to its specified height of seventy feet. The last mason’s work done was the cutting out of the two words “ Laus Deo ” (“ Praise be to God ”) upon the hist stone set over the door of the lantern. Round the upper store-room had already been cut the text “ Except the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that build it.” Soon after the iron balcony and the lantern were put in place, and, over all, the gilt ball, the screws of which Smeaton fixed with his own hand, perched on a little platform above the cupola, some hundred and twenty feet above the sea, while his assistant, Roger Cornthwaite, stood on the opposite edge, to balance his weight while he worked. On the 16th of October the merciful light shone out from the Eddystone.
■ For more than a century and a quarter it shone from Smeaton's tower; but about the year 1870 reports began to reach the Trinity House that certain suspicious tremors had been noticed by the light-keepers. Steps were taken to strengthen the building, but the tremors increased notwithstanding;
Digitized by Goode
THE PRESENT EDDYSTONE LIGHT.
103
and in 1877 the Elder Brethren of the Trinity House, with their engineer, Mr. James N. Douglass, made an inspection of the tower and rock. This inspection proved that the mischief lay, not with Smeaton’s building (which was strong enough to stand for another hundred years), but in the rock itself, which the waves were slowly undermining. The Brethren at once set to work. Many surveys were made, and a base for a new lighthouse discovered on a rick some forty yards S.S.E of the old tower. Its one drawback was that its summit stood only just above the level of low water, and the foundations, therefore, must be laid below that level. Mr. Douglass, however, could overcome that difficulty. The first landing on the rock was made on the 17th of July, 1878. The work began on the 23rd of that month, and the top stone was laid on the first day of June, 1882.
The main idea is that of Smeaton's structure, but there are many improvements. The new tower contains 4,668 tons of masonry. Smeaton’s contained 998 tons only. The stones are 2,171 in number, containing 63,020 cubic feet; and, to make all secure, each stone is dovetailed above, below, and on all sides with the stones adjoining, besides being cemented. - Smeaton’s tower had four rooms besides the lantern. Douglass's has nine, each larger than any in the old building, and the light is thrown almost five miles further than before. The stump is all that now remains of Smeaton’s tower, the upper part having been carefully taken, to pieces and ‘ re-erected on Plymouth Hoe. Smeaton had spoken of a " possible perpetuity ” for his work; but the true perpetuity lies in the type which he handed on to Rennie, Stevenson, and now to Douglass, all of whom, like the torch-bearers in the old Greek game, have taken the light from his hands, and run with it.
It was in a tender named the Smeaton that Rennie and Robert Stevenson plied between Arbroath and the Inchcape. Everyone knows Southey’s ballad of “The Inchcape Rock ” and the tradition of the bell placed upon it early in the fourteenth century by the Abbot of Arbroath, or Arberbrothok, to ring out its warning to mariner's: ar rd how a notorious pirate cut away the bell and sailed off, and grew rich with plunder, until at length he bethought hint of Scotland once more, and turned his vessel’s head for home. He drew near the coast in a thick fog, and knew the shore was not far off.
“They hear no sound, the swell is strong;
Though the wind hath fallen, they drift along, Till the vessel strikes with a shivering shock ;
* Oh, ChristI it is the Inchcape Rock I ’
“Sir Ralph the Rover tore his hair;
He cursed himself in his despair; The waves rush in on every side, The ship is sinking beneath the tide.”
Though the Inchcape lies but eleven miles cast of the Scottish mainland, near the entrances of the Firths of Forth and Tay, and extends its dangerous
Digitized by LnOOQle
104
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
back for almost two miles, no steps were taken to replace the bell or erect a beacon until the beginning of this century, when the Board of Commissioners ordered John Rennie to examine the site. In his report he recommended a stone lighthouse on the lines of the Eddystone. Powers were obtained from Parliament in 1806, and Rennie was appointed engineer, with Robert Stevenson ns his assistant.
“ SOMaiODI CALLED OCT ' A BOAT I ’ ” ip. 105).
The year 1807 was spent in building vessels for the conveyance of the stones, and in erecting machinery and building shops at Arbroath, the most convenient point on the coast for carrying on the land operations. A smith’s forge and a temporary beacon were put up on the rock itself, while ft floating light, in an old fishing-boat, was anchored off the reef, until the lighthouse could be finished. During the short period—shorter than in the case of the Eddystone—in which the rocks were uncovered, some progress was made in digging out the foundations. How dangerous this work was may be gathered from the following account of an accident which befell the workmen on the 2nd of September. The Smeaton had brought out a large number of masons
Digitized by LnOOQle
ON THE INCHCAPE ROCK.
105
from Arbroath that morning, and, having landed them safely on the rock, was riding off at a little distance. The wind was rising, and the men began to fear for the Smeaton’s cables. A party put off in a boat to see that all was secure; but before they could reach her she was adrift, leaving thirty-two men upon the reef in the face of a rising tide.
Before the Smeaton's crew could set her mainsail, and tack in towards their companions, she had drifted, with both wind and tide, about three miles to leeward, and it was clear that the rock must be covered long before she could reach it. The men on the rock had but two boats, that, in fine weather, might at a pinch carry twenty-four persons. Mr. Stevenson at once saw the
THE START POINT LIGHT.
gravity, and, as he thought, the hopelessness, of the situation. With great courage he kept his fears to himself, and allowed the men to go on with their work.
When they had been working for three hours or so, the water began to cover the lower parts of the foundation, and the men were forced to desist. The forge fire was put out, the smith ceased his hammering, and the masons their hewing and boring. When they picked up their tools and looked around, the vessel had drifted almost out of sight, and one of their three boats had gone in pursuit of it. No one spoke, but every man felt he was lost They looked towards Stevenson, but he had borne up a long while against the horrors of the position, and now was speechless. He tried to speak, but his tongue was parched in his mouth. He turned to one of the pools on the rock, knelt down, and lapped a little of the salt water. But, as he lifted his head, to his incredulous joy somebody called out, “A boat 1 ” and, sure
Digitized by GOOQle
106
THE STOUT OF THE SEA.
enough, there was a large boat making for them through the heavy sea. She proved to be the Bell Rock pilot-boat, which had come off from Arbroath with letters. Her timely arrival saved the workmen. They were all taken off and landed in safety, though completely drenched and exhausted.
Rennie visited the rock on the 5th of Octo l»er. Ho came off from Arbroath, and spent the night on board the lighthouse-yacht, where he and Stevenson had much to tell each other. Next morning there was a great display of bunting on the rock when Rennie landed and inspected the progress made, and the next day the whole party returned to shore for the winter.
The first stone of the tower was laid on the 10th of July next, and by the end of November three courses in masonry were finished. In 1809 the tower had risen to the height of thirty feet; by the end of 1810 the Bell Rock lighthouse was completed, and its light shone regularly after the 1st of, February, 1811. The curve of the tower at its base is much greater than that of the Eddystone, and it is generally allowed that no lighthouse has more ’ graceful lines. From its base to the top of the lantern it measures 127 feet.
It was Alan Stevenson, son of Robert, who erected, in 1838, the still more famous Skerryvore lighthouse, on the rocks of that name, twelve miles W.S.W. of the Isle of Tyree, in Argyllshire. The actual construction has no very salient points of difference from the works of Smeaton or Rennie: but instead of accommodating his workmen in a floating vessel, Stevenson built a barrack on the rock itself—a wooden tower, hoisted on three legs, under which the sea roared freely during the winter; and here, perched forty feet above the wave-beaten rock, the architect spent many weary days and nights, with nothing in sight but the breakers, and nothing to be heard but howling winds and lashing seas. On one occasion a tender could not come off with provisions for seven weeks. The seamen passed a dreary time. They had little to eat, they had no tobacco, they were short of fuel, and their sodden clothing was worn to rags. Their slumbers, too, were at times fearfully interrupted by the sudden pouring of the sea over the roof, the rocking of the house on its pillars, and the spurting of water through the scams of the doors and windows. Twice the shocks were so violent that every man sprang out of bed, and some even escaped out of the barrack on to the bare wall of the unfinished lighthouse, where they spent the remainder of the night in the darkness and the cold.
Yet life on the Skerryvore had (we are assured) its peculiar pleasures. Days and nights of weariness and terror were varied by peaceful hours, when the sea was glassy, and tho deep vault of heaven studded with a million stars, “ Among the many wonders of the great deep,” says Stevenson, " which we witnessed at the Skerryvore, not the least is the agility and power displayed by the unshapely seal. I have often seen half-a-dozen of these animals round tho rock, playing on the surface, or riding on the crests of curling
Digitized by
Google
THE SKERKYVORE LIGHT,
107
waves, come so close as to permit us to see their eyes and head, and lead us to expect that they would be thrown high and dry at the foot of the tower; when suddenly they performed a somersault within a few feet of the rock, and, diving into the flaky and wreathing foam, disappeared, and as suddenly reappeared a hundred yards oft’ uttering a strange low cry.”
The type we have been dealing with—the solid stone tower, conical, or at least, rounded in shape—has remained the type for all lighthouses exposed to the full fury of the sea. After this type, for instance, was built the Bishop Rock lighthouse, in the Scilly Isles, probably the most exposed lighthouse in the whole world, standing on an isolated rock, with three thousand miles of stormy ocean between it and the American coast On January the 30th, 1860, a wave dashed up the tower to the height of one hundred feet, and tore away the bell, weighing three hundredweight. Before the present stone tower was built, a fabric of iron piles was begun here, and carried up to the lantern, when, during, one stormy night in January, 1850, the whole thing disappeared. A much more absurd erection was once placet! where its neighbour, the Wolf Rock lighthouse, now stands. This was the huge figure of a wolf in copper, whose open mouth, as the wind poured into it, would bellow, and alarm the mariner. This Chinese phantasy went down before the first south-wester, and is now replaced by a magnificent light, visible, on any but hazy nights, for twenty-five miles. The Needles light may be seen for twentyseven miles, and those on Lundy Island and Barra Head for thirty-one and thirty-two miles; but these last lights stand 540 and 680 feet respectively above high-water. The distances, of course, will vary with the power of the light and the height of the lighthouse.
Of course there are many other lights to be noticed at sea, besides those of the lighthouses. These we shall deal more fully with in another chapter. As we leave the Eddystone behind us, and bear up Channel, we have first tho Start Point, with its two lights, one revolving, for the Channel, and another fixed, to direct vessels inshore, clear of the Skerries Shoal. Then, to the south, arc the three Casquets lights, on the Jersey side; on the north the two fixed lights on Portland Bill; and straight ahead the brilliant fixed light of St. Catherines, on the extreme south point of the Isle of Wight. And as we head our cutter N.W. for the Solent, the great Needles light comes into sight.
Now, with regard to these lights at sea, there are one or two points worth noticing.
The first is, that when first we make a light (supposing the weather to be at all rough), it is always flickering like a star. The reason for this is, that the light, when first seen, is just on a level with the horizon, and the waves, dancing in front of it, hide for a moment, and then leave it clear. Point number two is that lights in the neighbourhood of a large town (as, for instance, Liverpool) look yellow, and not white. This is, of course, caused by
Digitized byTooele
108
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
the smoke of the town. And, as a rule, lights will look brighter and whiter just before rainy weather, whereas a yellow, or dusky tinge, means that fine weather is coming. '
Point number three is, that different colours can be seen at very different distances. White lights show the furthest of all; next come red lights; and green lights a long way after. This is very easily put to the test with a ship’s port and starboard lights. Suppose the vessel to be coining straight towards you on a clear night—that is, with both her lights showing—her red port light will be visible long before her green starboard light.
the seed les light, isle or WIGHT.
And here, as we are steering up Channel, the most crowded sea*way in the world, we may omit for the time to speak further of lighthouses, their internal arrangements, and the means of lighting them; and get by heart the meaning of the lights on the ships that pass us, and the rule of the road at sea
After sunset every vessel under way is bound to show a green light on her starboard side, and on her port side a red light. This rule applies to all vessels, great and small; to steamers as well as to sailing ships. But a steam vessel has, in addition, to carry a white light at the mast-head, to distinguish her from a sailing vessel.
A steamer, when she is towing another vessel, must have, besides her ordinary lights, a second white light at her mast-head. So that, if we see ahead a red and a green light, and higher up two white lights, one over the other, we know that a steamer is approaching with another vessel in tow.
Digitized by LnOOQle
SHIPS' LIGHTS AND BULE OF THE ROAD.
109
Any ship which, from any accident, is not under command, will carry three red lights at the mast-head; and any ship employed in laying or picking up a telegraph cable, carries at the mast-head two red lights, with a white one between them, in a vertical line. Thus, a steam-dredger is very often to be found lying in fair-way with her three red lights up; and as she cannot get out of anybody’s way, it is everybody’s business to steer clear of her.
These lights, and these arrangements of them, will tell you at night what kind of vessel you are approaching; and, of course, the Merchant Shipping Acts are very stringent on the matter of ships' lights. And yet it is a too common thing for a merchant captain, either out of sheer carelessness, or to save a few pennyworth of oil, to neglect his lamps as soon as he fancies himself out of the track of vessels. Thus, on the 20th of January, 1887, a collision occurred off the South American coast, between a ship called the Ada Melmore and the K«pit nd a, an emigrant ship, resulting in the loss of more than two hundred lives, and all because it was the silly practice of the Ada Melmore's captain not to light his lamps when out in the open sea. For this he was fined £50 at Bow Street, and had his master’s certificate suspended for two years—a punishment that can hardly be called excessive.
Of course there are regular Rules of the Road for vessels, of which the most important are:—
1.	When two sailing ships are approaching each other^ the ship which is running free shall keep out of the way of the ship which is close-hauled.
2.	A ship which is close-hauled on the port tack shall keep out of the way of a ship which is close-hauled on the starboard tack.
3.	If two ships under steam are meeting each other end on, each must alter her course to starboard, so that each may pass on the port side of the other.
A A steamship must give way to a sailing ship if there is any chance °f a collision.
5.	If two steamships are crossing so as to avoid risk of collision, the drip which has the other on her starboard side shall keep out of the way of the other.
There are other rules both for sailing ships and steamships, but these are the principal. And that sailors might have the rule of the road at their fingers’ the late Mr. Thomas Gray, Assistant-Secretary of the Board of Trade, the chief rules into rhyme, as follows:—
b Two steamships meeting—
When both side-lights you see ahead, Port your helm, and show your Red.
Two steamships passing—
Green to Green—or, Red to Red— Perfect safety—Go ahead !
Digitized by
Google
110
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
3.	Two steamships crossing—
Note.—This is the position of greatest danger. There is nothing for it but good look-out, caution, and judgment.
If to your starboard Red appear, It is your duty to keep clear ;
To act as judgment says is proper:
To Port—or Starboard—Back—or, Stop her I
But when upon your Port is seen A steamer’s Starboard light of Green, There’s not so much for you to do, For Green to Port keeps clear of you.
4.	All ships keep a good look-oat, and steamships mast stop and go astern, if necessary—
Both in safety and in doubt Always keep a good look-out; In danger, with no room to turn, Ease her ! —Stop her I—Go astern !
But, as Mr. Gray also says, “The Legislature cannot make careless people careful, nervous people strong, ignorant people wise, or sleepy people wakeful Let them enact rules for ever, collisions will continue to happen through ignorance, bad look-out, or carelessness, just in the same way that ships will continue to be wrecked or stranded from the same causes.
And to these causes may sometimes be added obstinacy, one ship refusing to give way to the other. One calm day in 1885 the Louise Dagmar, a steamboat of the South-Eastern Railway Company, was crossing from Boulogne to Folkestone with the passengers of the Continental express from Paris to London. About three miles from Folkestone she met the Orient, a large four-masted steamer bound from London to Melbourne.
When first sighted the Orient was some two miles off, on the Louise Dagmars starboard bow, and steaming straight down Channel. Here, then, were two vessels whose course lay at right angles. Should each hold on, collision was inevitable. By a glance at rule 5 we see that since the Louise Dagmar had the Orient on her starboard band, it was her duty to give way, and the Orient's to keep her course.
This the Orient did, and held steadily on down Channel. The captain of the South-Eastern boat, however, refused to give way, ease his engines, and pass astern of the other. Instead of this he kept on starboarding his helm, till at length the two steamers were actually running side by side, as if having a race down Channel
The LouIse Dagmar steamed faster than the Orient, and at last managed, to forge far enough ahead to shoot across the other’s bows; but so close that
Digitized by LnOOQle
A CLEAB BREACH OF RULE.
Ill
one might have tossed a biscuit from one ship’s deck to the other. She was by this time down oft' Sandgate, two miles below Folkestone Harbour, and had to steam quietly back. And if this affair had resulted in collision and great loss of life it would only have been her captain’s fault for his clear breach of a perfectly clear rule.
Digitized by
Google
CHAPTER V.
GREAT NAVAL DISASTERS.	v
The Royal Georye at Spithcad—She is Heeled over for Repairs—A Puff of Wind does its Work—Nine	i
Hundred lost—Death, of Admiral Kempenfelt—Narrative of ■ Survivor—A Child saved by a Sheep	,
—Last of the Royal George—The Caytain—X Gale in the Bay—Captain Burgoyne's Heroism— The Admiral’s Mistake—Was it a Ghost?—Causes of the Disaster—The Queen Charlotte—An Ill-disciplined Ship—Off Leghorn—A Ship sot on Fire through Carelessness—Efforts of Lieutenant Dundas and his Volunteers—Help from Shore—The Ship Blows up.	•
FT1REMEND0US as we must consider the loss of the Fwfoi'ia, already narrated, our Navy has suffered worse. It was in time of peace, and in calm weather, that the Royal George went down on August 28th, 1782, carrying with her no less than 900 men. The Royal George carried 108 guns, and was at this time the oldest first-rater in the service—-having been put into commission in 1755—but was still considered a stout ship and a good sailer. Great Admirals had hoisted their flags in her—Anson, Boscawen, Rodney, Howe, and Hawke.
On August 28th she was anchored off Spithead, taking in provisions. Early that morning, during the washing of her decks, the carpenter discovered that the pipe which admitted the water to cleanse and sweeten the ship, and which was about three feet under water, was out of repair; that it was necessary to replace it with a new one, and, for that purpose, to heel the ship over on one side. This was effected by running out the guns on the port side of the ship as far as they would go, and drawing in the starboard guns, and making them fast amidships. This brought her porthole-sills on the lower side almost flush with the water.
It was about nine o’clock in the morning; the crew had just finished their breakfast, and a lighter with rum on board had just come alongside. She was a sloop of about fifty tons, and belonged to three brothers who used to carry stores on board the men-of-war. She was lashed to the port side of the Royal George, whose crew were piped to clear the rum out of her and stow it in the hold. The ship at this time was crowded with traders—Jews and others —and about 250 women, mostly wives and relatives of the sailors. A slight breeze ruffled the water and lapped it now and again over the sills of the port-
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE ROYAL GEORGE.
113
holes; but for some time nobody thought of danger. There were many mice in the lower part of the ship, and as the breeze freshened, and the water began to dash in more violently, the men hunted them about in the wash. Soon there was a brisk game going oil
The carpenter, perceiving at last that the ship was in great danger, went twice on deck to ask the lieutenant of the watch to give the order for righting her. The first time he got no answer at all, and the second the savage reply,
“ SHE FELL ON HEU BllOADSIDZ ” (y. 113).
“ If you can manage the ship better than I can, you had better take the command.” It was a very short time though before the lieutenant himself began to see the danger, and ordered the drummer to beat to right ship. But it was too late: the ship was beginning to sink: a puff of wind caused her to heel still more; over to the port side rolled the heavy guns and shot: and the water pouring in at every port finished the business. She fell on her broadside, with her masts nearly flat on the water, and went to the bottom like a stone. As she sank down, her mainyard caught the boom of the rum-lighter, and sank her, drowning several men on board.
So swiftly did it happen that the officers made no signal of distress; nor if they had, could help have been given. Admiral K einpen felt, whose flag-ship it was, had just been shaved by his barber, and was writing in his cabin when the ship sank:—
8
Digitized by LnOOQle
114
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
“A land-breeze shook the sliroildfl, And she was overset !
Down went the .Royal f Jeorge With all her crew complete.
“ It was not in the battle ;
No tempest gave the shock; She sprang no fatal leak, She ran upon no rock.
“His sword was in the sheath, His fingers held the pen, When Kempenfelt went down With twice four hundred men.”
The first captain ran to him with the alarm; but the heeling over of the ship had so jammed the doors that they could not be opened. Of the 1,200 souls on board at the time, all went down except the majority of the watch on deck (about 230), who saved themselves by running up the rigging, and were afterwards taken oft' by the rescuing boats; and perhaps seventy others, who managwl to scramble out through the ports. One who thus escaped tells how he looked back and saw the porthole behind him “as full of heads as it could cram, all trying to get out. I caught,” says he, “hold of the best boweranchor, which was just above me. to prevent falling back again into the porthole, and, seizing hold of a woman who was trying to get out of the same porthole I dragged her out.” The same writer, a Mr. Ingram, relates that he saw “all the heads drop back again in at the porthole, for the ship had got so hi uck on her larboard side that the starboard portholes were as upright as if the men had fried to get out of the top of a chimney, with, nothing for their legs and feet to act upon." He was sucked down to the bottom with the vessel, but rose clear to the surface and swam to a block that was floating near. When the ship sank, an opened barrel of tar stood on her deck. When he rose, the tar was floating on the water like fat, and getting into the middle of it, he came out as black as a negro minstrel. Getting on the block, he saw the Admiral’s baker in the shrouds of the mizzen-topmast, which were above water not far oft’; and directly after, the poor woman whom he had pulled out of the porthole came rolling by. He called to the baker to reach out an arm and catch her, which was done. For some time she hung, quite insensible, by her chin over one of the ratlines of the shrouds, but a surf washed her off again. She was again rescued shortly after, and life was not extinct; she recovered her senses to find herself on board our old friend the Victory, then lying with other ships near the Royal George. A still more marvellous escape was that of a little child who had been playing with a sheep on deck. As the vessel heeled he clung to the fleece of the animal, which swam about until a wherry came and rescued him. The captain of the Royal George was saved; but the carpenter, who did his best to save the ship, was drowned. .
A few days after the Royal George, sank, the bodies began to come up,
Digitized byVrOOQlC
THE CAPTAIX. 115
thirty or forty at a time. A corpse would rise “ so suddenly as to frighten anyone.” The watermen would strip the bodies of their buckles, money, and watches, and then make fast and tow them to land. The writer of the narrative from which this account is chiefly derived says that he “ saw them lowed into Portsmouth Harbour in their mutilated condition, in the same manner as rafts of floating timber, and promiscuously (for particularity was scarcely possible) put into carts, which conveyed them to their final sleeping place in an excavation prepared for them in Kingstown churchyard, the burial-place belonging to the parish of Portsea.” Many bodies were washed ashore on the Isle of Wight. '
There was no great depth of water where the .Royal Georg? sank, and very soon after she righted herself. As late as the year 1799 the top of her main* mast is said to have been visible: but all attempts to raise the wreck were unsuccessful until 1840, when Colonel Pasley undertook its removal. Wrought-irun cyljrulers, some of them holding over a ton of gunpowder, were lowered and tired by electricity, and the vessel was thus blown up piecemeal. Many of the sama, capstans, and other valuable parts of the wreck, were brought up by the divers, anti the timbers formed the basis, at any rate, of a local industry—the manufacture of relics of the Royal George—which continued to thrive until Unite a recent date. It is said that the total number of these relics, if pieced ugethcr, would build quite half-a-dozen ships of the size of the old first-rater, hup: as she was !
The divers who descended to the wreck reported that her appearance, when seen from a fathom above the dis k, was most Ixmutilul. She was covered with sea-weeds, shells, star-fish, and anemones; while in and out at every port awl opening swam fishes large am! small, darting and sparkling in the clear green water.
Thus the greatest of naval catastrophes belongs to the wooden period; but the fate of one ironclad, the Capta-ia, equals that of the Royal George in sudden horror, and falls not very far short of it in loss of life.
On September 8th, 1870, a little yacht, the Gazelle, not more than thirty-tive feet long, cast anchor in Ryde Harbour. She had come across the Channel in one of the most terrible gules of the century, and she carried on board the Empress Eugenie, who had just narrowly escaped from Paris and the anger of her people. So violent was the gale that the ladies were lashed to their berths and remained so during the whole passage.
The owner of this yacht, who had rescued the Empress so gallantly, was Field-Marshal Sir John Burgoyne: and the gale he bad come through had destroyed his son, Captain Burgoyne, in the Bay of Biscay, with a ship of over four thousand tons and a crew of six hundred men: as we shall tell.
The Captain, of 4,272 tons, had been constructed by Captain Cowper Phipps Coles, and had given rise to some angry discussion in her time. Coles, who
Digitized by LnOOQle
116
THE STORY OF TILE SEA.
was a scientific enthusiast, as well as a practical seaman, had distinguished himself in the Crimea, and had lately made many improvements in rendering vessels shot-proof. He is best known by his invention of revolving turrets, of which the Captain carried two, the strongest and heaviest yet built, with six
“I DIUGGED HER OVT*’ (A Hl).
powerful guns. Sailors used to say that these turrets gave her too much top-hamper, and made her liable to turn over. They also blamed her small amount of free-board—that is, the height of her sides out of water—which was only nine feet. Her forecastle and after-part were raised above this and connected by a light hurricane deck, which played its part in the disaster we have to relate.
On the evening of the 6th the Captain was sailing in company with her squadron; Admiral Milne, who commanded in the Lord Warden, had, indeed,
Digitized by Google
IX THE BAY OF BISCAY. 117
inspected her that afternoon. The weather was fine at sunset; later, it became dirty; at midnight the wind rose fast, and had soon increased to a howling gale. At 2.15 am. the sky was blown clear of the thick clouds that had covered
H.M.K. CAPTAtX VN'DEU AM. SAIL.
K- and the stars shone out brightly, the moon then setting; but there was no vessel to be seen where the Capbtln had been last observed. At daybreak the «inadron were all in sight, though scattered—all but one, that is. They wore ten ships that should have been eleven, and the (.'upto in was the missing one.
Liter it turned out that seventeen of the men and the gunner had escaped and landed at Corbucion, north of Cape Finisterre, on the afternoon of the 7 th. Every one of those men be longer! to the starboard watch. In other words, none Escaped except those on deck duty. Their tale was this:—The watch had been called out a few minutes after midnight, and, as the men were going on deck
Digitized by LnOOQle
118
THE STORY OF THE SEA,
to muster, the ship gave a heavy lurch to starboard, but quickly righted herself. The wind was blowing very strong, and she was only carrying her three topsails, ■ double reefs in each, and the foretopmast stay-sail. The yards were braced sharp up, and the ship had little way on her. No one knows whether her 1 screw was revolving, though her steam was partly up: probably not. As the 1 watch was mustered, Robert Hirst, a seaman, states that he heard Captain Burgoyne give the order, “ Let go the fore topsail halliards 1 ” followed by, “Let go fore and maintopsail sheets 3 ” Some of the men got to the topsail sheets, but by this time the ship was heeling over to starboard eighteen, twenty-three, then twenty-five degrees, lying right down on her side and trembling with every blow dealt her by the white and vicious seas that broke over her funnel , and would soon extinguish her furnaces. The roar of the steam from her boilers out-screamed the storm, but did not drown the	shouts	of the poor engineers	।
and stokers below.	Mercifully, this did not last	long.	As the ship heeled to	f
twenty-five degrees,	Hirst and two other seamen	made a dash for the weather-	I
forecastle netting and jumped overboard. A moment afterwards they were j washed on to the	bilge of the ship’s bottom,	for in	that moment she had	|
turned keel-uppermost, and almost immediately plunged to the bottom. Hirst 1 was carried down with her, but soon found himself on the surface again and grappling a spar, to which he tried to lash himself with his black silk handkerchief, He wns washed off, but got hold of the stern of the second launch which had been covered with canvas when stowed on board ship, and had consequently floated oft' without filling. Several men were there, on top of the • canvas covering. Presently there drove by the steam-lifeboat pinnace, bottom , up, with Captain Burgoyne and several men clinging to it. Four of them, including Mr. May, the gunner, at once jumped into the launch. Captain Burgoyne was then heard calling out, “Jump, men, jump!” but did not	offer	>
to do so himself. The canvas covering was cut away; and getting out the	oars,	;
they tried to pull up to the pinnace to rescue the captain and others still clinging there. This they could not do. Every time they tried to pull the	i
boat’s nose round to the sea to row her to windward, where the capsized	boat	I
was floating, they were swamped almost level with the thwarts, and two men were washed clean out of her. They set the pump going, baled with their caps, etc., and made a second attempt; still to no purpose. Once they got near enough to offer to throw the captain an oar: but he shouted back, “For 1 God's sake, men, keep your oars: you will want them ”— a piece of unselfishness that perhaps cost him his life, for he went down shortly after.
The following is Mr. May’s account of the disaster:—“Shortly after 0.15 a.m., being in my cabin, which was on the starboard or lee side of the ship, I was disturbed in my sleep by the noise of some marines. Feeling the ship uneasy, I dressed myself, and took the lantern to look at the guns at the turrets.............It	was but a very short time—from fifteen to twenty
minutes—past midnight. I then went to the after turret The guns were all
Digitized by
Goc [e
-BOTTOM UP, WITH CAPTAIN BURGOYNE AND SEVERAL MEN CLINGING TO IT" (p. 118).
Digitized by LnOOQle
Digitized by
Google
THE SHIP CAPSIZES.	119
right. Immediately I got inside the turret I felt the ship heel steadily over, deeper and deeper, and a heavy sea struck her on the weather side. The water flowed into the turret as I got through the pointing-hole at the top, and I found myself overboard I struck out, and succeeded in reaching the steam pinnace, which was bottom up, on which was Captain Burgoyne with five or six others. I saw the ship turn bottom up and sink stern foremost, the last I saw of her being her bows. The whole time of her turning over to her sinking was but from five to ten minutes, if so much. Shortly after, I saw the launch drifting close to us who were on the pinnace; she was but a few yards from us. I called out, 'Jump, men—it’s your last chance’’ I jumped, and succeeded with three others in reaching her. I do not know for certain whether Captain Burgoyne jumped or not. I was under the impression he did; but the others in the launch do not think so. At any rate, he never reached her. When on the pinnace, a large ship, which I believe to have been the Inconstant, passed us fifty yards to leeward We all hailed her; but I suppose the howling of the wind and sea prevented their hearing us.”
Mr. May now took charge of the launch, which presently sighted the lights of another big ship as it drove by in the gale, all unwitting of the catastrophe. Failing once more to make themselves heard, he and his men were beaten about till daybreak, when they sighted Cape Finisterre, inside which they landed after twelve hours’ heavy work with the oars.
One man, when he found the vessel capsizing, performed a feat which he may describe in his own words:—“Felt ship reel over, and felt she would not right. Made for weather-hammock netting. She was thrown on her beamends. Got along her bottom by degrees, as she kept turning over until I was where her keel would have been, if she had one. The seas then washed me off I saw a piece of wood about twenty yards off, and swam to it.” In other words, this man had got over her side and gradually walked up to the bottom. As he swam, two drowning men caught hold of him, and actually tore the legs off his trousers. He could not help them, and they sank for the last time.
Now the evidence of these men proves beyond a doubt that the Captain disappeared off' the face of the waters shortly after midnight. It is not a little curious, therefore, that the Admiral of the Squadron, who clearly had doubts of her stability, believed that he saw her, and indeed described her appearance and behaviour, up to 1.30 a.m.. more than an hour after her exit to the depths. In his dispatch, dated from H.M.S. Lord Warden, off Finisterre, September 7th, 1870, Admiral Milne stated that, shortly before 1 am., the Captain was astern of bis ship, apparently closing under steam. The signal ' open order ’ was made, and at once answered, and at 1.15 a.rn. she was under the Lard Warden's lee quarter, about six points abaft the beam. From that time till about 1.30 a.m. I constantly watched the ship..............She was
Digitized by LnOOQle
120
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
heeling over a good deal to starboard,” etc. It must, of course, have been another ship that the Admiral saw; unless we are to believe that the ghost of the Captain still walked the waters in which she had been drowned an hour before.
The causes of the disaster were hotly discussed at the time, but general opinion set it down to the overpress of canvas which the Captain carried at the time to enable her to compete in speed with her rival the Monarch. But
LEGHORN HAU HOUR.
the Monarch was adapted for sailing, whereas the Captain with her low freeboard and heavy top-hamper was not. Many authorities held that she ought not to have carried a stitch of canvas. The late Admiral Sherard Osborn wrote to the Times:—“The desire of our Admiralty to make all their tighting-ships cruise under canvas, as well as steam, induced poor Captain Coles to go a step further, and to make a ship with a low freeboard a sailing ship.” Poor Captain Coles was in the ship when she sank, and paid for his mistake with his life. With him were drowned Captain Burgoyne (as we have related); a son of Mr. Childers, who was then First Lord of the Admiralty: the younger son of Lord Northbrook; the third son of Lord Herbert of Lea; and Lord Lewis Gordon, brother of the Marquis of Huntly; with six hundred sailors of all degrees. Portsmouth, Plymouth, Dcvonport, and some Cornish seaport towns
Digitized by GOOQle
LOSS OF THE art EX CHARLOTTE.
121
and villages were the chief sufferers. Plymouth than one-third of the crew. In one street in made widows.
Very soon after the Captain was lost, her sister
alone had furnished more Portsea thirty wives were
ship, the Sultan, was being
titled out at Portsmouth.
While she lay along side
“buckets webe bboigmt" (p 122).
the jetty in the dockyard, some grim humorist took a piece of chalk and wrote up on her side, “ Will leave on Thursday with mail- for the Captai a ” — a gentle bint that she was likely to follow her sister to the bottom of the sea. The Government offered thirty pounds reward for the discovery of this wag; but he was never Caught. ‘
Superstitious people have noted that ships christened after members 'rf the Royal family seem peculiarly liable to destruc-
tion in time of peace. The Victoria, of course, has just supplied them
with another reason for
their belief. We have
seen, too, what befel the
Rnyal George, named after George III. Her sister ship, the Queen Charlotte, named after his wife, came to grief almost as horribly.
She was a three-decker of 110 guns, and, next to the Ville /le Par in, u vessel taken from the French, the largest British ship afloat. She had t arried Lord Howe’s flag on the Glorious First of June, and (one is sorry to relate) owing to the loose state of discipline in which she was kept while his flag flew aboard, had been the very focus of the mutiny at Spithead in 1797. Her discipline was still somewhat lax when, in 1799, under the command of Captain James Todd, and, bearing the flag of Vice-Admiral Lord Keith,
Digitized by
Google
122 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
she was put on to the Mediterranean station. “ The Queen Charlotte will be better here than on home service,” wrote Earl St Vincent, the Commanderin-Chief, to the Admiralty, “ for she has been the root of all the evil you have been disturbed with.”
On Sunday, the 16th of March, 1800, Lord Keith landed at Leghorn from his flagship, and ordered Captain Todd to get under way and proceed to the island of Capraia, about twelve leagues distant, which island, then in the possession of the French, he had some notion of attacking.
At four o'clock next morning, the ship being then three or four leagues on her way, the men were washing the decks, and stowed away a quantity of loose hay near the Admiral’s cabin and close to a tub containing a match that was kept burning for the signal guns.
At six o’clock the men went to remove the hay, and found that some, of it was on fire. The alarm was given at once, and buckets were brought to put out the fire. But the hay had been smouldering too long. The mainsail was set at the time, and took fire directly the flames broke out. Running up the mainmast these flames quickly reached the boats upon the booms, and cut off this means of escape.
Captain Todd and his first lieutenant, Mr. Bainbridge, stood on the quarterdeck and kept good order among the men. The pumps were manned, the hose and fire-engines worked with a will, but without the least effect.
Most of the officers, whose watch it was below, were asleep in their berths when the fire broke oiit Among these was Lieutenant the Hon. G. H. L. Dundas, who was aroused by a marine rushing into his cabin and calling “Fire’” Springing out of his cot, and putting on a few clothes, he tried to get up the after hatchway, but was choked back by the smoke. He then tried the main hatchway, and had almost reached the top when he lost consciousness and dropped back, half-suffocated, on the deck below. Recovering after a while, he ran to the fore hatchway and so reached the forecastle, where he found a number of petty officers and men. The carpenter suggested to him to send some of the men to flood the lower decks and batten down the hatches to prevent the fire falling down into the body of the ship. Lieutenant Dundas, accordingly went down with about seventy volunteers, opened the lower deck ports, plugged the scuppers, cleared away the hammocks, and turned on the water-cocks: while every hand that could be spared was employed in dashing water on the bits of burning -wood and burning rigging that kept tumbling down the hatchways and filling the space between decks with steam. At length they were able to get the hatches closed and covered with wet blankets and hammocks, and thus managed to keep the fire off the lower deck and magazines for a long time. But about nine o’clock the deck was so far burnt that several of the middle deck guns came tumbling through. Then, and not till then, did Dundas and his men retreat to the forecastle, climbing up through the lower deck ports. Here they found 150 men drawing up
Digitized by GOOQle
Digitized by Googl
RESCUE OF THE SURVIVORS,
123
water in buckets and throwing it aft upon the fire; but it was clear nothing could save the ship.
By this time almost all the boats were burnt. Some of the crew, however, managed to get the launch into the water, but without mast, sails, oars, or Hidden There was a dash for her, but she drifted away to leeward faster than the men could swim. While this was happening the mizzen mast went by the board with a crash, hurling a number of men into the water. A few managed to reach the launch; the rest were drowned. The guns, which were shotted, now grew hot, and began to go off left and right
Lord Keith, who saw the fire from the shore, tried his best to induce the Italian boatmen to put off to the assistance of his crew. With infinite trouble he persuaded some half-dozen boats to go. But the Italians, as soon as they found the guns going off, flatly refused to go near the ship. A boat from an American merchant vessel, manned only by three hands, put these cowards to shame, and rowed close up to the Queen Charlotte—too close, for a crowd jumped into her and capsized her, and every man was drowned.
The fire, still advancing, drove hundreds out towards the bow-sprit and jibboom ; until the latter gave way beneath their weight, and numbers were thus flung into the water.
It was not till close upon eleven o’clock that Lieutenant Stewart persuaded the Leghorn men to help him in making another attempt. This time he reached the Queen Charlotte, managed to get his boats under her bows, where all the survivors were driven, and succeeded in taking them off'. An hour after he gave the signal to pull for shore, th? fire reached the Queen Charlotteu magazine and blew her high into the air. In the Painted Hall of the Greenwich Hospital there hangs a fine picture by Ijoutherbourg of the Glorious First of June, when Lord Howe look the Queen Charlotte and laid her alongside the Montaigne, the French Admiral's flagship; and hard by is another painting that represents King George III. and the Queen presenting Lord Howe with a diamond-hilted sword on the quarter deck of the Qiieen Charlotte as she lay off Portsmouth after the victory. So that what with one thing and another—the First of June, the Spithead Mutiny, and the manner of her end—this ship had a mingled career of fame and infamy, splendid success and dismal tragedy
Digitized by LnOOQle
CHAPTER VI.
OF FLAGS AND THE “ HONOUR OF THE FLAG.”
The Significance of Bunting—The Union Jack and its History—The St. George's Cross—Lord William Howard and Philip of Spain—Sir William Monson and the Dutch Admiral—-The First Union Jack—-The Modern Union Jack—The Ensign—Admirals and their Flags—The Royal Standard—The Sovereignty of the Sea—King John—Fighting it out—Fishing Rights and the Dutch—“Mare Librum “ and “Mare Clausum”—Sir John Hawkins and the Spaniard—Sir R. Mansell—Commodore Young and Van Tramp—Conversation at Sea—The International Code and its Working.
TO speak of flags and the Honour of the Flag is to open one of the most romantic chapters in The Story of the Sea. Indeed, the bunting flutters through all that story: sometimes at the trucks of two tall ships in action, when we wait breathlessly to see which shall be first hauled down; sometimes at the mizzen peak of an old ship of discovery, blown in tatters by the arctie wind, or drooping under tropical suns; sometimes as the pirate’s dismal emblem, a black rag with skull and crossbones. The landsman is apt to look upon a flag simply as an ornament, or, at most, as a pretty distinctive sign, of about as much significance as a bunch of ribbon in a recruiting sergeant’s cap. As a matter of fact, to those who understand them, flags have a tale to tell, and to those who also know our naval history, a deeply interesting tale. Indeed, as Mr. Clark Russell has said, the history of our flags is the history of our Navy. “Just as a ship looks glorified when ‘ dressed ’—-that is to say, when she has hung out all her colours from peak-end to mastheads, and from mastheads to the end of the flying jib-boom, and thence to the water—so is our national marine story radiant with the flags, pennons, and ‘ancients,* which flutter through it, sometimes blowing saucily, sometimes riven and seared with flame and bullet, sometimes a mangled rag valiantly hanging by a nail at the top of the mast, or ‘seized’ in the rigging, whilst below it the battle rages like a thunderstorm.”
Take the case of “the meteor flag of England ”—the Union Jack. There arc many people, no doubt, who, if they have ever given the subject a thought, imagine that some clever or distinguished person took it into his head one day that Great Britain wanted a flag, and promptly designed one. As a
Digitized byVrOOQlC
THE GLORIOUS FIRST OF JUNE” (i>. |O). (Krom the Painting by P» tic Loutherbonry, It..t,)
Digitized by GOOQle
126
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
matter of fact, the Union Jack was no more built in a day than Rome or the British Empire.
The flag of England down to the year 1606 was the St. George’s Jack. St. George, the Red Cross Knight, is, of course, the Patron Saint of England: and the shield of St. George gave England her flag—a red cross upon a white ground.
This was the flag under which our fathers defeated the Spanish Annada, and won our earlier naval successes; and they were as jealous of its honour as ever we can be of the Union Jack's. In those days the foreigner who refused to dip his flag to the St. George’s Jack, thereby acknowledging England’s sovereignty of the sea, was apt to find himself somewhat rudely called to order. In the year 1554, in Queen Mary’s reign, Lord "William Howard was sent with a fleet of twenty-eight sail to escort Philip of Spain up the Channel. Prince Philip was accompanied by IGO of his own ships: -and the Spanish Admiral came along very proudly with the Spanish flag flying at the main topmast-head. He was probably surprised to find himself greeted with a good round shot by Lord William Howard, who flatly refused to give the Prince any other welcome till the Spanish Colom's were hauled down.
About the year 1604 again, Sir William Monson was cruising up and down with his fleet with instructions to assert and convince foreigners of that supremacy which the Royal House of Stewart had just inherited from the Royal House of Tudor. In July, 1605, he put in to Calais, and found there six Dutch ships newly arrived to join the Dutch squadron, which he had left off Dover a day or two before. One of these was the Admiral’s ship. On Sir William’s approach this Dutch Admiral dipped his flag thrice. Sir William sent him a message to take it in altogether. The Dutchman refused, asserting that he had struck his colours thrice, and that was acknowledgment enough. Sir William assured him that it was not, and added that if he did not promptly salute as he was told, the British Admiral would at once weigh anchor, fall down to him, and settle the question with powder and shot: “ for,” as he
put it, " rather than I would suffer his flag to be worn nations as were to behold it, I resolve to bury myself in Admiral, however, was convinced at lost. He took down for the rest of the fleet to follow him, and stood off to
in view of so many the sea." The Dutch his Hag, fired a gun sea in a huff “ And
thus,” Sir William winds up very dryly, “ I lost my guest the next day at dinner as he had promised.”
Among the eye-witnesses of this little incident was the Spanish General Sciriago, who had been present, as he afterwards told Monson, when Lord William Howard sent a shot at King Philip II. for wearing his flag in the narrow seas when he came a-court!ng Queen Mary.
But with the accession of James I. and the union of the crowns of England and Scotland, the national flag was altered to give Scotland a share in it. The Patron Saint of Scotland is St. Andrew, and the Scottish flag was blue
Digitized by Google
THE “UNION JACK.”
127
■with a white St. Andrew’s cross. To put a stop to all squabbles about the precedency of the rival banners of St George and St. Andrew, the Union Jack, as it was then called, was made by blending the two, or rather by superimposing a red cross with a white border on the Scottish flag. The white border is the remains of the white ground of the old flag of St. George.
It was in the year 160G that James I. ordered this flag to be used : and the suggestion is that it took its name from James (Jacques), and so was ‘•Jacques' Union,” or “ the Union of Jacques,” very easily shortened into “ Union Jack.”
THE CROOK OK KT. ANPHEW .
1 THE CROSS WK KT. UEORCk.
THE JACK or 1801.
THE UNION JACK.
When England and Scotland were finally united in 1707 it was formally declared the “ Ensign Armorial of the United Kingdom of Great Britain."
Under this Union Jack Blake fought, and Monk, and Ascue, and Rodney, and Benbow, and all the naval heroes who adorned the close of the last century. But it was not the Union Jack that we know. Our present Jack first came into use on January 1st, 1801, when the Union with Ireland was concluded. A place on the flag had then to be found for a red diagonal cross, sometimes (though erroneously) called St. Patrick’s Cross, St. Patrick had no cross: and the saltire really came from the arms of the Fitzgerald family— even as the American “ Stars and Stripes ” were adopted from the shield of the Washingtons. This new red cross was placed upon the white St. Andrew’s cross, leaving a margin of white on either side. And so our modern Union Jack was reached.
It is not so very easy to make this flag correctly. The red diagonal cross, you will notice, does not come exactly into the corners of the red St. George’s cross: and the white margin of this red diagonal cross is twice as wide on one side as on the other. Amateurs, and most foreigners, almost
Digitized byUrOOQlC
128
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
always fail to notice this, and their imitations are easily detected by the expert eye. More than once during our wars a foreigner attempting to sail under false colours hits failed because their captain had not taken sufficient care to make his Union Jack convincing.
Colonial men-of-war are now permitted to fly the flag of the British Xavy, and their ensigns have the Jack in the corner with the special device of
flag which according to
the colony in the fly. Campbell—
And it may be that the
“ Has braved a thousand years The battle and the breeze—”
(if it can be called the same flag) may have yet other changes before it. In the last century it carried the words;—
“ For the Froteatant Religion. and for the Libert;/ of England,''
an aggressive legend, wisely removed when both the Protestant Religion and the Liberty of England were obviously out of danger. Let us hope that, whatever legend it may have to carry, it will never be the watchword of a faction; for the great flag should float as high above party warfare as tho maintenance of our Xavy should stand above party questions.
Our other national flag is the Ensign — more commonly seen than the
Digitized byUrOOQlC
THE WHITE EXSIGN.
129
Union Jack, of which it is indeed an adaptation. This is either a white, a blue, or a red flag, having the Union Jack in the " canton,” or top corner next the staff’ The white ensign has, in addition to the Jack, the red St. George’s cross: and is, indeed, the old St. George’s Jack, the first national flag of England, with the Union Jack in the corner.
This, the U'kite ensign, is the flog of the British Navy.
In the old days all three ensigns were found in the Navy. There were then nine orders or degrees of Admirals. When a captain was promoted to flag rank, he first of all became a Rear-Admiral of the Blue. His next step was Vice-Admiral of the Blue, then Admiral of the Blue. After that came RearAdmiral, Vice-Admiral, and Admiral of the Red; and then Rear-Admiral, ViceAdmiral, and Admiral of the White, which was the very highest rank of all
At that time all the ships of a fleet or squadron flew the colour of the Admiral in command; and his rank—whether Rear-Admiral, Vice-Admiral, or Admiral—could be known by the mast at which the flag flew.
A Vice-Admiral’s flag was hoisted at the fore; an Admiral's at the main; and a Rear-Admiral’s at the mizzen. And so to give an instance or two, if an Admiral of the White were in command, a white ensign would be flying at the main truck; if a Vice-Admiral of the Red, a red ensign at the fore. If a council of war was to be held, an Admiral would hang his flag in the main shrouds; a Vice-Admiral in the fore shrouds; and a Rear-Admiral in the mizzen shrouds.
These distinctions of the White, Red and Blue haVe been done away with. To-day there are only three ranks of Admirals—Rear-Admirals, Vice-Admirals, and Admirals; with a more or less ornamented distinction that ranks above all —that of Admiral of the Fleet. Of Admirals of the Fleet there are only seven or eight, the Prince of Wales being one and the German Emperor another. An Admiral of the Fleet flies a Union Jack at the main ; an Admiral a St. George’s Cross at the main; a Vice-Admiral the same flag with a distinguishing red ball in the near upper corner, at the fore; and a RearAdmiral the same flag at the mizzen, but with two red balls.
Besides these flags we must mention the Royal Standard, the flag of the Sovereign and all Princes and Princesses of the blood royal. This as everyone knows is a square flag divided into four quarters; one upper and one lower quarter having the three leopards of England on a red‘field; whilst the other upper quarter has the red lion of Scotland on a gold field, and the remaining lower quarter the harp of Erin on a blue field. When the Queen crosses to the Isle, of Wight in her yacht, the Alberto, she flics this Royal Standard at the main, the Admiralty flag (pink ground with a foul anchor) at the fore, and either a Union Jack or a white ensign at the mizzen. Of course, as she passed every ship would dip its colours and keep them dipped until she had gone by.
Or suppose that the Prince of Wales is paying a visit to a man-of-war as she lies off Spithead. The man-of-war will be flying a white ensign at each 9
Digitized byUrOOQlC
130 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
masthead, while the tender conveying the Prince will bo Hying his own Royal Standard. (We must explain here that each member of the Royal Family has a slightly different Standard from that of the sovereign, the difference being a label that runs across the top of the Hag.) As soon as the tender is alongside and the Prince has set foot on the gangway, down comes the white ensign from the man-of-war’s mainmast and up goes the Standard, while at the same moment the Royal Standard is hauled down on board the tender.
These are our English flags. Let us now see what is meant by the phrase “ the honour of the Flag."
As far back, as the time of King John England claimed the sovereignly of the Sea, It was Alfred the Great who first gave England a navy; and his vessels not only travelled to the North Cape on voyages of discovery, but opened communication with the Mediterranean, and penetrated to the extreme east of the Levant, and enabled the king to carry on a direct trade with India. William of Malmesbury speaks of the silks, shawls, spices, and aromatic gums which Alfred received from the Malabar coast in return for presents sent to the Nestorian Christians. Alfred constantly encouraged the science of navigation, and earned his right to the title of “ Father of the British Navy.”
But it is not till we come to King John that wc find the English Navy -formally proclaimed the mistress of the sens. In tho second year of his reign that monarch sat down at Hastings and decreed, with the assent of his peers, that “if tho governor or commander of the king’s navic in his expeditions shall meet any ship whatsoever by sea, either laden or- empty, that shall refuse to strike their sails at the command of the king’s governor or admiral, or his lieutenant, but make resistance against them which belong to his fleet: that then they are to bee reputed enemies if they may l>ce taken, yea, and their ships and goods confiscated." So unites John Selden in his famous “ Mare Clausum," a book to which we must refer again. And there is no doubt that King John meant what he said. This king, perhaps the ablest of all the Angevins, occupies a pretty black page in English history: let it be remembered to his credit that he pluckily fitted out 500 ships under the Earl of Salisbury, in the year 1213, to do battle against a fleet twice that size with which Philip of France intended the invasion of England. In the result the English completely broke their enemies, taking 300 sail and driving more than 100 ashore; while Philip had to destroy the unhappy remainder to prevent their falling into English hands.
The dominion of the sea was stoutly maintained by our Edwards and Henrys. Selden finds testimony to it in the gold-rose noble coined by Edward III. The stamp on this coin represents a ship afloat, and an armed king sitting in it as upon a throne. The temper of these times may be illustrated by the following incident. In the reign of Edward I. an English sailor happened to be killed in a brawl in a Norman port. Immediately, and in tho most light-hearted manner, England deel red war against Franco, and the two
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE HONOUR OF THE FLAG.
131
nations agreed to settle the dispute on a certain day with the whole of their naval forces. The spot of battle was to be the middle of tho Channel, marked out by anchoring there an empty ship. And this strange duel actually took place on April 14th, 1293, when the English won and towed off in triumph 259 of the enemy’s vessels. .
Then, as now, it was over fishery disputes that these naval encounters chiefly arose. As the Behring Sea arbitration proves, nations are beginning to turn to other methods of settlement; but the history of our lesser tussles at sea is, to a large extent, the history of the herring and the Dutchman's determination to get him at any cost. Henry VI. allowed foreigners to fish round our coast, but usually prescribed a “ close season,” and forbade them to employ any boat above thirty tons. The French, when they sought soles for the table of their king, Henri IV., had first to ask leave of the English admiral, and their boats were seized if caught fishing without that leave. In the eastern waters the Dutchman had to obtain permission to fish from the governor of Scarborough Castle; and Selden quotes Camden in proof of the large profits they made thereby and the generosity of the English, “ who have ever granted them leave to fish, reserving alwaies the honour and privileges to themselves, but through a kindle of negligence resigning the profit to strangers.”
It was in 1609 that Hugo Grotius wrote his “ Marc Liberum,” an elaborate defence of the Hollanders’ fishing-rights, and an attack on our title to the sovereignty of the sea, which (us he contended) was a gift of God common to all nations. By an odd turning of the tables, this is the very thesis which Lord (then Sir Charles) Russell defended the other day before the arbitrators at Paris; and by the arbitrators' decision it is now settled, and will probably stand in international law for ever, that every nation has a right to free use of the sea. But in 1609 this contention annoyed the English excessively, and it was felt that some answer must be prepared.
The answer was found by the great John Selden in bis ' Mare Clausum"— a wonderful piece of special pleading by a wonderful scholar. His treatise deals at length with this question of the supremacy of our flag, and, if historical evidence went for everything, must have been unanswerable. As it was, foreigners hod to be convinced by other methods. We have seen how Lord William Howard fired on Prince Philip of Spain. Another British commander had soon to impress the same lesson upon the Spaniard. When a Spanish fleet was despatched to fetch Anne of Austria home from Flanders, it put into Plymouth Sound on its way, and there met Sir John Hawkins, who was riding in the Cattewater with a squadron of her Majesty's ships. The Spanish admiral neglected to salute. The method of saluting was then to lower topsails, a much more laborious operation than running a flag up and down on the halliards.
The Spanish admiral was lazy, perhaps: but Hawkins was not at all tho kind of man to take that into account. He sent a shot at the admiral’s
Digitized by Goode
132
THE STORY OF THE SEA,
rigging. The admiral took no notice. The second shot went through his hull. Upon this he sent an officer with his compliments and a protest Sir John refused to hear a word, but ordered him to go back and tell his master that, having refused to pay due respect to the Queen of England in her seas, he must clear out of them within twelve hours. Upon this the Spanish admiral himself came aboard the Jenn# of Lubeck, where Sir John's flag was flying. His remonstrances, however, had not the slightest weight, and he was obliged to retire and do what he was told.
Nor did the French faro better. Sir Robert Mansell, admiral of the narrow seas, going to Gravelines to receive the Spanish ambassador, despatched his vice-admiral, Sir Jerome Tamer, to Calais to attend the French ambassador. The Frenchman, thinking this a slight, took an ordinary passage boat at Calais and came out with his flag flying. Sir Jerome at once sent to ask the admiral what he should do. Back came the order: “ Shoot and strike him." The Frenchman pulled his flag in.
The fishing quarrel raged hotly through the first half of the seventeenth century: and up to the year 1674 we had a deal of trouble in forcing the Dutch to pull off their hats to us. In 1652 Commodore Young fell in with a Dutch man-of-war that refused to salute. He sent a boat and requested the captain to take oft' his hat “ If I do,” answered the Dutchman, '• the States have promised to take oft' my head.” So they fell to, and the Dutchman was beaten. Five days afterwards Blake, who was lying off Dover, saw A’an Tromp approaching with the Dutch flag flying. Blake sent three shots at it. Tromp, who was not the sort of man to be bullied, returned the compliment with a broadside, and they fought till nine at night, when the British were reinforced, and Trottip made off.
In the peace of 1654’the Dutch agree to salute the English flag; but in 1665 the trouble begins again. De Ruyter, meeting Sir John Lawson in the Mediterranean, made the proper salutation. Lawson refused to return the compliment. His orders (said he) did not allow him to strike to the subjects of any king or state in the wide world. We may fancy that De Ruyter remembered this answer when in 1667 he sailed up the Thames and burnt our shipping right and left. In 1674 the English sovereignty was defined and acknowledged, and the Dutch undertook to strike their sails to any fleet or single ship carrying our king’s flag, “as the custom was in the days of his ancestors.”
But flags serve many purposes besides expressing politeness. Most of the conversation between ships at sea is carried on by means of them. And it is time for us to see how this is done.
First, of the Ensign. If a British ship is in serious distress and needs assistance at once, she hoists her ensign upside down. A flag flying from the rigging, too, is the sign that something is the matter.
Digitized by
Google
CONVERSATION AT SEA.
133
If a ship flies her flag at half-mast it is a sign of death. In France, Italy, and other Roman Catholic countries every vessel, large and small, carries her
flag at half-mast on Good Friday. A merchant-ship may be known to be in Mourning, too, if the line below her bulwarks be painted blue instead of
the more common white or
But for all intricate conversation a code of signals must be used. There used to be a number of these codes, the most ingenious perhaps king that invented by no less a man than the author of “ Peter Simple.” But Marrvat’s Code, with all the others, has given way to what is now known as the International Cotie, originally published in 1857. At first this was known as the Commercial Code; but now that it has been adopted by all civilised nations for their imperial as well as their mercantile navies, the more comprehensive title fairly belongs to it.
Of course, all imperial navies have their own private codes as well for their own private use; and the greatest care is taken, by frequently changing these, to keep them unintelligible to other
yellow.
Photo. by F. Gregory &• Co.. Sb anti.
SEMAPHORE SIGNALLING.
nations. But for ordinary purposes they use the
International Code.
At the signal stations set up around our coasts for the purpose of reporting ships, etc., no notice is taken of any signal not given by this code. Translations of it have been made into every important language; and the code itself has been so arranged that when, from distance or haze, colours cannot be distinguished easily, it may nevertheless be used under the form of Distance Signals, or by means of a Semaphoric system.
Digitized by LnOOQle
134
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
THE iNTERNAHONAL CODE ©F SIGNALS.
Me AH* YtJjJ»W
MEANS Bum.
Each of the flags represent a consonant of the
and ending with AV.
described thus:—
The International Code, then, consists of eighteen flags, viz.:—1 burgee (that is, a square flag with a swallow tail end), 4 pennants (long narrow flags coming to a point), and 13 square flags; and in addition a pennant called the “ Code Signal,” which is also used as tho “Answering Pennant.” This makes nineteen flags in alt alphabet, beginning with B
These are shown in our illustration, and may bo
B Red, swallow tail
C White, with red spot D Blue, with white spot.
Burgee.
Pennants.
F Red, with white spot.
G Yellow and blue vertical.
H White and red vertical
J Blue, white, and blue, horizontal.
K Yellow and blue vertical.
L Bine and yellow, quartered.
M Blue, with white saltire.
N Blue and white, in sixteen chequers.
P Blue, with white centre. (This is the Blue Peter.)
'e Flags.
Q Yellow. (This is the Quarantine Flag-)
R Red, with yellow cross.
S White, with blue centre.
T Red, white, and blue, vertical.
V White, with red saltire.
W Blue border, enclosing white, with red centre.
" Ausu-ering Pennant."
Vertical stripes, three red and two white.
Now though these flags represent certain letters of the alphabet, they are not usi d. as we use letters, to spell certain sounds called words (for the code has no vow: Is) but as arbitrary signs or signals. N V, for instance, means “I am sinking”; B D, “ What ship is that?”; J V K, “I am short of provisions”; and the meaning of each signal can be found by reference to the Code Book, just as you look out a foreign word in the dictionary.
At sea or in harbour, a ship that wishes to signal first of all hoists her ensign, with the code signal under it, at the peak. She then runs up her signal at the mast-head, if possible; if not, where best seen.
Signals are made with one, two, three, or four flags.
Digitized by
Google
THE INTERNATIONAL CODE.
135
Single Flag Signal*.—Of these there are only three:—(1) the white pennant (C), meaning “Yes:” (2) the blue pennant (G), meaning “No;” (3) the “answering pennant.” When a ship has completed her signal, the ship •ignnUeil to runs up the answering pennant for a moment to say " I understand,’ and when the signalling ship has finished her conversation she also runs it up to say “ That is all.”
In all other signals the two important points to note are (1) the number of flags hoisted and (2) the form of the topmost flag.
Tiro Flag Signal* are of three kinds:—
1.	If they have the red burgee uppermost they are Attention or Demand ■Signals. Thus B C means “Show your ensign”; B H, “ Vessels that wish to be reported all well, show your Distinguishing Signals,” and so on.
2.	If a pennant is uppermost they are Compa** Signals. Thus C B means “North”; GT, “North by West,” and so on.*
3.	If a square flag is uppermost they arc Urgent, Danger, or Di*tre** Signals. Thus N M means “I am on tire”; PT, “Send a pilot”: N C (the '|wial Distress Signal according to the Merchant Shipping Act of 1873), means “ In distress; want assistance.”
These Urgent Signals range from H B to S D, and are of extreme importance wherever or whenever made. A vessel at sea meeting or passing another flying one of these signals should, if possible, at once bear down towards her.
Three Flag Signal*, no matter what they begin with, are General Signals, ^i these there are about 5,000, relating to all ordinary subjects of inquiry or conversation between ships; such as navigation, crew, passengers, cargo, pro-nsions, books and instruments, lights and buoys, soundings, latitude, longitude, weather, money, value, numbers, and so on. Thus KGP means “Engines
These Compass Signals are given in points and half points. Those ranging From N to E J N have the white (C) pennant uppermost.
„	E	„ S j E	„	„	blue (D)	„	„
,,	S	„ W j S	„	,-,	red (F)	„	„
„ W „ N A W „	,, blue and yellow (G) pennant uppermost.
Esch of these pennants with the flag W underneath indicates a .Miteoeoloyical ileport.
Digitized by
Google
I3fi
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
broken down,” L P H, “ Are the soundings a safe guide ?” J V K, “I am short of provisions,” B J R, “I am loaded with combustibles,” B K P, “ Cannot stop the leak.”
Four Flag Signals are of four kinds:—
1. If the red burgee is uppermost, they are “ Geographical Signals,” and refer to the names of ■	places ; as B N C W, which means “ Moreton Bay ”;
’	. or B D R M, “ Portsmouth.”
, -	2. If the pennant G (yellow and blue) is upper-
most, it means the name of a man-of-war. Thus G T V R, means “ H.M.S. Sultan"
3.	If a square flag is uppermost, it stands for the name of a merchant vessel or a yacht. Thus M B C D will stand for the “ s.s. Cotopaxi, of \	Liverpool.”
J V K, ■•Shorter Provision,."	4. But if, in a Four Flag Signal, either of the
pennants C D or F be uppermost, it is what is known as a Spelling or Vocabulary Signal.
For though the general list includes, as we said, about 5,000 words, still there are many which it omits; and this part of the code provides for every word in every language outside the general list. It is very useful for spelling names, as of passengers. For example, we wish to signal the name of Foster. We turn to Part II. of the Signal Book, and find that C B S J spells “ Fos” and C F N T “ ter ”; and so we are able to signal this name in two hoists. So much for Spelling, Last of all wc have Vocabulary Signals that stand for phrases or whole sentences in conversation at sea. Thus C P B F means “ Christmas Day,” D S F K, “ When will you be ready for sea ? ” F C R Q, “ 1 will pay you a visit”
This is but a general account of the International Code, which is the best hitherto invented, being at once distinctive and comprehensive. For each signal has but one meaning, and out of the eighteen flags we can make, under the conditions just described, close upon 80,000 different signals; and since the colours of these flags may be indistinct through haze or distance, they arc supplemented by Distance, Semaphore and Boat Signals, all of which correspond to the flag system, and may be interpreted by the Code Book.
Before closing this chapter wo have just space
K G P, 14 Engines Broken Down.”
enough to refer briefly to
one or two flags that remain to be noticed.
Digitized by LnOOQle
OTHER NOTEWORTHY FLAGS.
137
The Blue Peter is a square blue flag with a square of white in the centre (similar to the P flag in the code), and is always hoisted at the fore on the day when a ship sails.
Houae Flay*.—Every great steamboat company or shipping firm has its own private flag, or "house flag,” which is always flown at the main. Of these we
b x c w, i u t v h. । m n c o. । c r b f.
“Mortton Bay,”	I	11H.M.S. NuUub,” I	“SS. O^jkij:1 ct	I “ChrititiuRS Day."
I	' Liverpool.”	*
shall liave to speak further when we deal with the rise and history of the chief shipping lines.
Almost every yacht, too, belongs to one or more of the numerous yacht clubs; and each club has its own flag. This club flag is called a burgee. It is not a swallow tail flag, however, like the burgee of the code, but comes to a point like a pennant. Besides this burgee every yacht flies the ensign at the peak, or, if it be a yawl, on its small mizzen. These ensigns are sometimes red, sometimes blue, and may or may not carry the club’s device in the fly. One club only, the Royal Yacht Squadron, carries the white ensign.
We have seen that the White ensign is the flag of the Royal Navy. The Red ensign is the flag of the Merchant Service, and the Blue ensign that of the Royal Naval Reserve. Now and then ono comes across a large merchant ship that flies the Blue ensign, A vessel is only privileged to do this when the captain and at least ten of her crew belong to the Naval Reserve.
The Blue ensign is also worn by hired transports, in which ease it carries tho yellow Admiralty anchor in the fly; and every ship employed by a public office carries the blue, with the badge of that office in the fly.
A Pilot Flag is the Union Jack, or national flag usually worn by merchant ships, having round it a white border one-fifth of the breadth of the flag; and is hoisted at the fore.
Digitized by LnOOQle
138
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
In war time, if a ship takes a prize, the victor’s flag is hoisted on board over that of tho vanquished. Thus if an English cruiser were to tow a French prize into Plymouth Sound, that prize would have the white ensign flying with the French tricolour below it.
Digitized by GOOQle
CHAPTER VII.
LIFE IN THE ROYAL NAVY : AS IT WAS.
The “Good Old Davs”—The Impress Service—Robert Eastwick's Adventure—Admiral John Campbel’ —Life on Shipboard—Foul Air—Bad Food—What became of it?—Hawke's Example— Tinned Meats—The Franklin Expedition—A Had Smell and n Bad Shot—Rum—Sickness—Scurvy—The Xrptuur—Anson's Specific—Captain Cook defeats the Scurvy—A Caso of Rapid Promotion— Punishments—Keelhauling and Marooning—The Story of Jeffrey, the Sailor—Alone on a Barren Rock—The Rescue—Flogging and Hanging—Cornwallis and the Mutineers—“ Stem and Starn alike”—Nelson's CoQin—A Fickle Husband.
TTTHEN year after year we read the accounts of the mobilisation of the Meet ' ’ for the summer mameuvres, and how ships, commissioned one day, are at sea the next, fully manned and steaming down Channel, ready for any of the exigencies of war, it requires an effort to understand that this despatch is of very recent birth, and that, within the knowledge of many still living, a ship when commissioned was often kept for weeks (or even months) before she could collect the number of seamen who formed her “ complement.” In time of war such delay Wight have been disastrous, and therefore, if seamen were wanted, and did not at once volunteer, they were by law forced to serve; they were arrested, put on hoard a ship of war, and enrolled as part of her complement, whether they liked ■t or not. It is nowadays the custom to speak of this arrest as brutal, illegal, unconstitutional. It was not unconstitutional, it was not illegal; and if often brutal, was not more so than other forms of arrest then common enough in England, or than the conscription has frequently been on the Continent.
From the very earliest times—at any rate, from the times of the Plantagenets—every mariner was bound by law and custom to serve the king afloat ■n tune of need, just as, in fact, every able-bodied man, not a seaman, was bound to serve him on land. But our early campaigns at sea were neither frequent nor long, and the men were raised without much difficulty.	When
■bips increased in size and voyages in length, men disliked being taken away from their homes for long and distant service; and evaded the call whenever they could. The merchants, too, aggravated the difficulty. The drafting great numbers of seamen into the fleet caused a lack of men for the Merchants ships; wages rose, and the temptation to avoid service under the
Digitized by LnOOQle
140
THE STOKY OF THE SEA.
Crown was almost irresistible. Even during the first Dutch war, in Oliver Cromwell’s time, there had been great difficulty in finding seamen for the fleet; but that difficulty was largely due to the absolute want of sailors in the country. Afterwards the numbers grew; but so did our commerce, and towards the end of the seventeenth century, and ever since, the difficulty was due to the
board ships of war.
It was then that the
" press,” as it has been described by Smollett, by Marryat, and other novelists, was developed. It was, in fact, quite a matter of course. When a ship was commissioned, an officer or a midshipman, with a “ gang ” of men, was sent to open a rendezvous and enter seamen. In time of war a rendezvous was kept permanently open in every seaport; men were entered in much the same way as at a military rendezvous in the neighbourhood of Westminster at the present time. But if the men didn’t come in fast enough —and in time of war they never did—search was made for them; when found they were arrested and, with very scant ceremony, were bundled on board the receiving ship, from which in duo time they were sent to the fleet and detailed to such ships as were short-handed.
Strictly speaking, the word “press” was not recognised; when a seaman
Digitized by
Google
THE IMPREST SERVICE AND THE PRESS-GANGS.
141
COMMODORE ANSON.
entered, he was paid a shilling as earnest or “ imprest,” in the same way that a shilling was paid to a recruit for the army. The recruiting service for the fleet was thus officially the “ imprest ” service, and the men were officially said to l>e “ imprested." But popular usage very naturally spoke of the men as “pressed,” and of the service as the “press”; and as such, with the meaning naturally belonging to them, the words have become part of the language.
The traditional idea of the “press” is that it took men of every sort; that everything was fish that came into its net. This is not quite right, and yet it is not quite wrong. Theoretically, it could only touch seamen or boatmen. Any seafaring man—not having a legal protection— was liable to be taken. Landsmen were not legally liable, and, though they were very often picked up and sent to the fleet, they could not be legally retained. But, though the law had no hold on them, the captain or first lieutenant of the ship to which they were sent had; and if they were stout, ablebodied men, he was not likely to let them go unless the law was able to intervene in their favour, which it could seldom do in time to prevent the ship going to sea with them on board. Of course, it occasionally happened that a “pressed” man, a landsman, had some little political interest: some friends who could get his case represented
with eflect, and then down would come an order to the captain of his ship to release him, though it may not always have been obeyed. “ Protections ” were given only to masters of merchantmen, to apprentices, and to first mates of seagoing ships; but if the press was “ hot,” and the fleet going to sea, a “ protection ” was not of much use unless it was perfectly regular and the man had it in his pocket at the time he was seized.
So many stories of exaggerated brutality or extremely rough usage have been told by the novelists that a true story of impressment, as related by the victim, will appear tame. It is, however, well to see how the usage worked in actual practice. In 1790, at the time of the dispute with Spain about Nootka Sound, a smart young fellow named Eastwick was just out of his time, and though only eighteen, had, by a piece of extraordinary good fortune, been appointed chief mate of a brig then taking in cargo below London Bridge. The work was almost finished, the brig was to sail in four days, when young Eastwick got three days’ leave, and, with a protection for that time in his pocket, went ashore. A day or two afterwards he met his captain, who told him that the brig’s sailing was postponed, and gave him two days’ additional
Digitized by^OOQlC
142
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
leave. At the end of his leave he, with his captain, was walking down to the quay to go on board the brig, when, on turning the corner of a street, he was stopped by a lieutenant of the Inconstant frigate, in command of a pressgang, who asked him who he was.
“ My fear ”—he tells the story himself—" confused me, and I did not answer. Captain Ellis said I was his chief officer, returning with him to his ship. My protection ticket was demanded, and the date of it showed I was behind my time, so the lieutenant immediately claimed me and carried me aboard the Enterprise, Captain Vanderbilt, the principal officer in London for pressed men, whose ship was lying in the river just off the Tower.” On board the Enterprise Captain Vanderbilt heard what he had to say, but pointed out that it was not in his power to help him, as the protection had ended the day before. “ * That, sir,’ I replied, ' is true. But a protection was granted for the period of my leave, which was extended by my own captain.’ ‘ Your captain,’ answered Captain Vanderbilt, ‘ cannot extend the period of your protection, so that plea will not avail you.’” The lad then begged that he might be allowed to procure a substitute; “ for,” he said, “ I have just obtained my first appointment as chief mate, and if I am now pressed into the Navy I shall lose that which 1 have ■worked hard to obtain.” Captain Vanderbilt was at first incredulous. “ Why,” he said, “ you are but a lad. Still, if you have deserved such promotion, I take it there must be particular merit in you, and ... I should not be doing justice to his Majesty if I accepted a common sailor for an officer of your parts. If you desire your discharge, you must provide me with two men.” This Eastwick could not do, for the price of substitutes was then twenty guineas each; and as war had not been declared ho might be free in a few weeks. So he was put on board the tender to join the Inconstant at Woolwich.
“ At Greenwich we were obliged to anchor for the night, and the lieutenant in charge, having too few hands to guard so many men, proffered my liberation from the crowd below if I would take a pair of pistols and a sword, and stand guard over the hatchway during the night. It was so repugnant to my feelings to be cooped up with the drunken sailors and longshoremen who were crowded between decks in an atmosphere that nearly suffocated me, that I very gladly accepted the lieutenant’s offer; and thus it happened that, though no one on board the brig was more anxious for liberty than myself, it fell to my lot to prevent my fellows in misfortune from escaping.” On board the Inconstant he found an old friend in the purser, who spoke in his favour to the captain, and obtained for him a rating as " master's mate.” But shortly after the dispute with Spain was settled, many of the ships were paid off, the Inconstant amongst the number: and Eastwick returned to the merchant service.* Had
• “A Master Mariner: Brins' the Life and Adventures of Captain Robert William Holtwick” (“Adventure Serina” London: T. Fisher Unwin. 1891), pp, 29-39.
Digitized byVrOOQlC
EXPERIENCES OF THE “PRESS."
143
lie chosen to volunteer for another ship in the Navy, he might certainly, with his qualifications, have been again rated master’s mate, from which, in the stirring times that followed, promotion was within his reach; and his memoirs might have been entitled “ Life of Admiral Sir Robert Eastwick, G.C.B.,” instead of “A Master Mariner.”
In illustration of this the story of Admiral John Campbell may bear retelling. Campbell was the son of the minister of Kirkbean, in Kirkcudbrightshire, who — as was the fashion with Scotch ministers — had a large family and a small income. The boy was little more than a child when he was obliged to shift for himself and was bound apprentice to the master of a coasting vessel. He was growing a big lad when one day—it must have been about 1736 or 1737—the coaster was boarded by a party from a ship of war in want of men, who, according to the exigencies of the time, pressed every soul on board except the master and his apprentice. The mate, who had a wife and family at home, wept bitterly; so much so that Campbell begged the impress officer to let the mate go, and take him instead. “ Aye, my lad, that I will,” was the answer; “I would much rather have a boy of spirit than a blubbering mam tome along.”
The circumstances of his entry told in his favour, and he was rated midshipman at once. He was afterwards master's mate on board the Centurion, with Commodore Anson, in his celebrated voyage round the world; and after the capture of the Acapulco ship, he was promoted to be master of the (ent itrion. . On his return to England, Anson’s interest at the Admiralty was very groat, and Campbell was still a young man when be was made lieutenant, and afterwards captain. He was captain of the Royal Geo rye, carrying Sir Edward Hawke’s flag in the great battle and utter defeat of the French fleet m Quiberon Bay, November 20th, 1759. He became a rear-admiral in 1778, was captain of the fleet with Admiral Keppel in the notorious battle off Ishant; was afterwards commander-in-chief at Newfoundland; and was vicc-admiral of the Red at the time of his death, in 1790.
It must not, however, be supposed that it was common or in any way usual for a young fellow entering the Navy, either by impressment or as a volunteer, to rise to a commission. It was at the discretion of the captain to put him on the quarter-deck as a midshipman or master’s mate; but even then he did not become an officer unless he was recommended to the commander-in-chief. In that case he might be promoted to be lieutenant; there he stopped. The number of men who entered really as common seamen, and rose to a higher rank than that of lieutenant, was very small indeed. Still there was a possibility, quite as good, perhaps, as that of the average piou-plou in the French army finding a marshal’s baton in the bottom of his knapsuck
But the life of the common seaman was very hard. Once- on board his ship he never left her, except on duty, till sho was paid off To all intents, the ship was a prison, with—as everybody knows—the additional chance of
Digitized by LnOOQle
144
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
being drowned. As, during last century, a king’s ship was generally engaged in war, there was also the chance of being maimed or slain outright; but that, perhaps, was not considered a disadvantage, as it involved the corresponding chance of maiming or slaying some confounded Frenchman or Spaniard: and the excitement of a battle made amends for much. But independent of these chances, a ship was not a healthy domicile. The officers fared better than the
men: they had better accommodation, and sometimes better food. For the
men, indeed, both accommodation and food
A WIS'IISAIL.
were very bad. The ships were crowded; hygienic science was non-existent; and cleanliness imperfectly understood. A stench was commonly got rid of by making a stronger; as, for instance, by burning pitch or sulphur. The bilges were left unpurified, unventilated, and the filthy gases from them pervaded the whole ship, lowering the vitality of the men, and rendering them an easy prey to sickness, even when they did not actually generate pestilence. It was only by slow degrees that efficient methods of ventilating between decks, where the men lived and slept,
were introduced. About 1742, Mr. Samuel Sutton invented a pump, hand-worked, of course—for expelling the fotd air, the fresh air being left to find its own way in; and this plan gave results far superior to any previously obtained. When Admiral Boscawen went out to the East Indies, in 1747, he had some of his ships fitted with Sutton’s machines, and attributed to them the exceptionally good health of his men. The pumps, however, were clumsy, the working of them was laborious, and the plan never took root ; the rather that the much easier plan was introduced of driving fresh air down, by windsails, leaving the foul air to find its way out. Windsails are large pipes made of canvas, with a cowl at the upper end, which was held up and open by cords fastened to convenient parts of the rigging, and trimmed so that its mouth faced the wind. In modern ships metal cowls have taken the place of the old canvas windsails; but a reversion to the principle utilised by Sutton, of removing the foul air, is now strenuously advocated L>y many. Of course, at the present time the foul air could be removed by a. much simpler machine than Sutton’s, and without any laborious pumping; but
no change has yet been decided on.
Digitized by^OOQlC
FOUL AIR AND BAD PROVISIONS.
145
Another and almost universal hardship was the bad provisions. In quantity these might sometimes be sufficient to satisfy the cravings of hunger. In quality, they were always nasty, and very commonly, loathsome. The staples were biscuit, salt beef, salt pork, and salt fish. The biscuit, made— by the rascality of the contractors—of bad flour, became infested with maggots, known as weevils, from the name of the victualling-yard at Portsmouth: half the weight of the biscuit might not improbably be made up of weevils; and to within thirty years ago, no “ old salt ” would think of putting a bit of biscuit into his mouth without first tapping it twice on the table to
“ OKOG."
1‘hutu. by H'. (jieyury <t t<
knock the weevils out; the action became instinctive, and would be done, quite as a matter of course, with perfectly good biscuit on a table on shore. The salt fish was very commonly putrid: when it was very bad, it was condemned and thrown overboard; but a good deal had to be endured before that extreme measure could be adopted. Pork more frequently became rancid, and the beet dry and hard. It used to be said that snuff-boxes could be turned out of a piece of beef, and, when polished, might pass for mahogany. Perhaps this wasn’t true; but the beef was certainly cruelly hard. It continued to be so till about forty years ago, when the hard beef and rancid pork—stores, it used to be said, from the old French war time—suddenly disappeared. The idea afloat was that the soldiers in the Crimea ate them up. If that had been so, the soldiers and the war correspondents would probably have let the world know about it; but what is very certain is, that there was a singular improvement in both beef 10
Digitized by Google
146	THE STORY OF THE SEA.
and pork during the time of the Russian War. At times the menu was diversified, and the beef and pork, instead of being hard or rancid, 'were more or less rotten. When more so, they were thrown overboard; but when only less, the best had to be made of them.
If circumstances permitted, fresh beef and vegetables were served out instead, and then the ships’ companies were “ in clover.” Nothing seems to have tested the abilities of our greatest commanders more than their providing for the due supply of fresh beef and vegetables, and the good health in which the men were kept. Off Brest, during the long blockade of 1759, Hawke had his men plentifully supplied, with the result that sickness was almost forgotten; but after the nearly total destruction of the French fleet in Quiberon Bay, the weather—it was then December—set in very bad, and the ships with the bullocks on board could not get to the fleet The fresh beef ran out, and the stimulus of an expected fight no longer kept the men up. They fell sick fast; and those that weren't sick growled:—
“Ere Hawke did bang
.	Moan seer Conflans,
You sent us beef and beer;
Now Mounseer’s beat, We’ve nought to eat, For you have nought to fear.”
It was Hawke that set the example of this constant supply of fresh pro-' visions for a fleet at sea; and some of his successors—notably Nelson—went still further in the same direction. When the fleet was going into action at the Nile, several of the ships had still a considerable number of live bullocks which they had brought from Syracuse. These were stalled between the guns, and had to be thrown overboard. So also in the celebrated watch off Toulon, the supply of beef and vegetables—onions, more especially—-was one of the first points of the admiral’s care.	.
Nowadays our men receive a considerable proportion of “preserved meat” of different kinds, good, nutritious, and palatable; but on its first introduction, some fifty years ago, great quantities of it had to be condemned, partly by reason of some imperfection in the tinning, largely also by reason of some imperfection in the contractor’s morality. From one of these two causes, a great deal of the tinned meat supplied to the fated Arctic expedition under Sir John Franklin proved to be bad. The condemned tins were afterwards found stacked at Beechy Island. “ The loss of so large a proportion of the supply of provisions was doubtless a main cause of the disastrous fate of the expedition two winters afterwards.” [Sir John Richardson’s “ Polar Regions,” p. 163.]
One instance of this happened at Hong-Kong, in 1857, on board the Calcutta, an eighty-four-gun ship, then bearing the flag of Sir Michael Seymour. One evening Lord Elgin, the ambassador-plenipotentiary, was dining on board with the admiral, and about ten o’clock his boat, then lying astern, was ordered
Digitized byVrOOQlC
“ GROG.”
147
to haul up alongside and get ready for his lordship’s return. Just at this moment the ward-room steward, in his berth, opened a tin of preserved herrings for the supper of one of the officers. He had not noticed by the bulging of the tin—a certain sign—that it was bad till, on being opened, the stench announced it in the most unmistakable language. The steward lost his head, and with the offensive tin in his hand, scattering its malodorous particles as he went, he rushed through the ward-room, and threw it out of the stern port—a thing, of course, strictly forbidden—so adroitly and well-timed that it plumped right into the stern sheets of the ambassador’s boat, emptied out the greater part of its contents, and bounced overboard. Fortunately, the cushions and cloths had been removed, and there was time to cleanse the boat before Lord Elgin was ready; but the naval Hitachi of the embassy came on board the Calcutta the next day to impure into the matter, which was hushed up with a reprimand of the offending steward.
While the staples of the seamen's diet were in the very bad condition that has been described, it can scarcely be supposed that the accessories were much better. These were cheese, the general state of which can be imagined; butter, which was ladled out as oil, and most commonly rancid oil; peas, which went to make pea-soup; and oatmeal, which was manufactured into some sort of porridge, nautieally known as “ burgoo." There was no tea, no cocoa, no sugar.
The water, too, kept in wooden casks, was for the most part indescribably nasty, and the men were of necessity driven to strong drink. From the earliest times the recognised drink was beer, or, when the Bordeaux trade allowed it, “beverage” wine. The allowance of beer seems always to have been a gallon per man per day. For short voyages it answered very well; but when ships kept the sea for months and months bn end, beer was difficult to carry on account of its bulk, and difficult to keep good, by reason of the rolling of the ship. So that when beer could not be kept good, or procured at all, and when wine was not to bo obtained, spirits were issued instead. Many people have an idea that, from time immemorial, nun has been the established drink of sailors. This is quite a mistake. Rum was served out in the West Indies; in the East Indies, arrack; in the Channel the substitute for beer was a “malt spirit," much the same, apparently, as what is now known as whiskey, with probably a good deal of fusel oil in it. Ships leaving England for a distant voyal?e—as, for instance, Anson’s voyage to the South Seas and round the world-carried brandy.
But whatever the spirit, the quantity served out to each man, at dinner-time, was half a pint, which in times of extra exposure or bad climate was increased to three-quarters of a pint. This was served out neat, and in one issue. A man might mix it with water, be might brew punch, or he might drink it off as it was. Of course, too, he might sell it, and he very often did so; the inevitable result was that there was a great deal of drunkenness, which Vernon, in the West Indies, in 1740, materially checked by his celebrated order that
Digitized by v hooq Ie
UK
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
the rum should be mixed with four parts of water, and should Ite issued twice a day, for diimer and supper. The bestial drunkenness and crime, which necessarily accompanied drunkenness, were immediately stopped; though, of course, with five half-pints of strong “ grog ” issued to each man, but not necessarily drunk by him, there was still a vast and dangerous amount of inebriety, which has yielded only to the cutting down the spirit ration to half a gill, and to the more liberal issue of cocoa, tea, and coffee.
“ IN SPITE OF HIS STBVOGLES ” (p. 150).
What with bad, monotonous, and insufficient diet, the want of proper ventilation, the often imperfect and improperly understood sanitation, and the frequent infection brought on board by newly-raised men, it is not to be wondered at that ships and squadrons and fleets were often scourged with most fearful sickness. Many diseases, which on shore, where the patient can be segregated, are of little or of only personal importance, became terrible pestilences under the conditions of life on board ship. When the Neptune of ninety guns and 770 men went out to the Mediterranean with the flag of Vice-Admiral Lestock on board, in 1741, she buried fifty-four men on the passage, and had 250 sick when she arrived at Minorca; and this does not seem to have been
Digitized by
Google
SCURVY.
149
CAPTAIN COOK.
very exceptional Similar instances might be quoted by the hundred. When infectious fever got on board the result was disastrous; some form of typhus— or, as it was then called, putrid, spotted, or jail-fever—was frequently very deadly, and was often mixed up with small-pox and the other diseases already referred to.
But when by extraordinary care or good luck these various sources of infection were escaped, then came scurvy—perhaps the most awful scourge of sea-faring men. The most terrible feature of this dread disease was the mystery which attached to it. Medical aid seemed useless: the surgeons could do nothing, and conjectured that it was caused by emanations from the sea, and must therefore be inseparable from sea life. This appears now the more remarkable, as they must have seen that it did not attack the officers in anything like the same proportion as the men. We know that this was because the officers were better fed (though even they fared but badly) and were better lodged. The natural ventilation of the ward-room was perfect, and the officers’ cabins were, in those days, either in the ward-room, or on the gundeck outside. It was still more remarkable, because as early as the year 1600 Sir James Lancaster knew and proved the efficiency of hme or lemon juice as a
specific remedy; but the knowledge of this, as a practical measure, was completely lost, and among the many remedies that were tried with more or less success towards the end of the eighteenth century, lime juice was one of the last Medicine, as such, did no good. In his voyage round Cape Horn, when the surgeon had exhausted his skill, Commodore Anson served out to the sick and dying men doses of Ward’s "pill” and "drop.” The ingredients of the “•pill” are probably forgotten; the “drop” was a preparation of nitrous acid and mercury, and, like most quack drugs, “ never twice of the same strength.” [Gentleman’s Magazine, 1798, pt II, p. 739.]
During the West Indian campaign of 1780-82, Sir Gilbert Blane, the physician of the fleet under Rodney, was able to introduce many improvements both in diet, cleanliness, and regularity, with extremely good effect. Wine was issued instead of spirits, and when it was found that the men obtained rum from some private stills set up in St. Lucia, where the fleet principally lay, Rodney sent a party round the island, and destroyed every still on it. Tho result of this care was that, in the West India climate, the number of sick in the fleet was extremely small, and on April 12th, 1782, was quite
Digitized by
Google
150	THE STORY 'OF THE SEA.
insignificant; and that while the fleet in the Channel, on returning to Spithead after a few weeks' cruise, sent from 4,000 to 5,000 men to hospital
It was Captain Cook, however, who must be accredited with the solution of the problem, how to keep men free from scurvy; and indeed the right method of suppressing this plague was perhaps the greatest discovery of that great discoverer; or, to use the words of Captain Wharton, “That it should be left to a man of little education to discern the combination of means by which this enemy of long voyages could be conquered is the most remarkable thing about this remarkable man. He himself notices the disinclination of the sailor to any new article of food, especially when not particularly palatable; but he soon found means to induce them to understand that their lives greatly depended on these rather nasty messes. Sour-krout; the unsavoury portable soups of that day; the strange greens that Cook insisted on hunting up at every land he visited, and boiling with their ordinary food; the constant washing between decks; the drying below ■with stoves even in the hottest weather; the personal baths; the change of wet clothing; the airing of bedding, were all foreign and repugnant to the notions of the seamen of the day, and it required constant supervision and wise management to enforce the adoption of these odd foods and customs.”* To Cook, and to Cook alone, the success was due. Wallis and Byron, who had preceded him in the South Seas, had taken anti-scorbutics, but suffered severely from scurvy. Furneaux, who sailed with Cook in the second voyage, and under precisely similar circumstances, had scurvy on board his ship the Adventure, while Cook in the Resolution had a clean bill of health. It was only in Cook’s ships, and in the Discovery, commanded and officered by men who had sailed with him and seen his methods, that exemption occurred.
But though, owing to better food and housing, officers in the Navy suffered much less from disease than did the men, there were some maladies—notably the Yellow Jack—that seemed to pay no respect to rank. Here is an instance of rapid promotion in consequence. One day, during the French wars, a certain William Quiller happened to be in Plymouth without his “ protection.” An officer of the press-gang there, seeing that he was a strong and well-built man, gave orders to seize him, and in spite of his struggles he was soon haled on board a frigate just on the point of sailing for Jamaica. Shortly after setting sail the names of the crew were called over, to which each man answered; but on Quillet’s name being called he was ordered to stand aside. Captain Whitter, who commanded the frigate, then put some questions to him, and, finding him to be the son of an old friend, appointed him to the quarter-deck, where he soon displayed uncommon smartness and ability. At Jamaica the ship was attacked by yellow fever, then raging in the island, and by the time the vessel
• “Captain Cook's Journal during hi a First Voyage round the World.” Edited by Captain W. J. Ia Wharton, R.N., F.R.S. Elliot Stock, 1893.
Digitized by LnOOQle
FLOGGING AND KEEL-HAULING. 151
completed her stay there all the superior officers, including the captain, had either died or been invalided home, thus leaving William Quiller in command of the frigate, after having been on board her only twenty months. He then proceeded to bring her home, which he accomplished in safety.
The number of men drafted in from jails and dens of iniquity in the larger towns not only accounts for the jail-fever and many other diseases on board our ships, but also explains the common severity of punishments and the almost brutal discipline that prevailed. Jack is no longer whipped and pickled, but is protected by Act of Parliament (or rather, many Acts), and seems none the worse for it. But his back suffered cruelly in the “ good old times.” In the spacious times of great Elizabeth, Robert, Earl of Essex, drew up certain instructions and delivered them to the Lord High Admiral to be read twice a week to the crews of ships after Divine service. Profane language, brawling, and dicing were to be put down, and “picking and stealing you shall severely punish; and if the fault be great, you shall acquaint us therewith, that martial law shall be inflicted upon the offenders.” But what were the punishments that captains could inflict? Monson tells us: “A captain may punish according to the offences committed, viz., putting one in the bilboes during pleasure, keep them fasting, duck them at the yard-arm, or haul them from yard-arm to yard-arm under the ship’s keel, or make them fast to the capstan and whip them there, or at the capstan or main-mast hang weights about their necks, or to gag and scrape their tongues for blasphemy or swearing. This will tame the most rude and savage people in the world.”
So keel-hauling, if it be an invention of the Dutch (as is commonly supposed), must have been a very early one. The Dutch, at any rate, were masters of the art. Every reader of naval stories knows what keel-hauling is. A man is dragged under the ship’s bottom and up again, his back flayed with the barnacles, until it is certain that one more dip will settle him. In Rogge-wein’s “Voyages” we find a refinement on this method of torture. A man, filled with drink, had high words with the cook, and finally, losing all control, stabbed himself 'He was carefully tended until his wounds were healed. As soon as he was strong enough he was brought forward and, his crime being declared, he was keel-hauled three times; then received three hundred lashes. After this his right hand was pinned to the most with his own knife. Not content with this, the captain kept him chained to the forecastle, meaning to set him ashore on the first desolate island they came across. Such an island was found off the Brazilian coast, and there the poor wretch was carried and left to starve to death.
This horrible punishment of “ marooning ”—i.e., setting a man ashore on a barren and uninhabited rock to die of hunger and thirst—was common enough among the old buccaneers. With them it was the custom to allow the maroon a gun, a few shot, a bottle of water, and a bottle of powder; and any man was liable to the punishment who defrauded the " company ”
Digitized by LnOOQle
152
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
to tho value of a dollar in plate, jewels, or money. This at least we learn from the “ articles” of Captain Bartholomew Roberts, pirate, and his crew. A man who deserted his ship or his quarters in battle would also be marooned; but the punishment was a little too savage for the Navy even in its worst times. A case, however, did occur as late as the year 1807. We may
11 00 YOU BBS THAT MOCK ? ” (P. 153X
tell the story at length.
In 1807, the year of the Peace of Tilsit, among the many privateers busy in the Channel, there sailed from Pol-perro, a fishing haven on the south coast of Cornwall, the fast sailing schooner Lord Nelson. After cruising in the Channel for a week or more without success, she put into Falmouth for provisions. Our privateers, though under the protection of letters of marque, were constantly liable to the visits of English ships of war, which fre-
quently boarded them at sea or in harbour, and impressed the picked men of their crews—against law, as we have seen. In this way the Lord Nelson, whilst in Falmouth Harbour, was boarded by the eighteen-gun brig-sloop Recruit, and deprived of several of her men and boys. Among these was Robert Jeffrey, who had learnt the craft of a blacksmith at Polperro, but had left it for the more attractive occupation of a sailor, and shipped himself ort board the Lord Nelson, When pressed into the Recruit, ho discovered his knowledge of the blacksmith's trade, and was appointed armourer’s mate.
Digitized by
Google
THE CASE OF RICHARD JEFFREY.
153
The Recruit soon afterwards sailed for the West Indies She was commanded by Captain the Hon. Warwick Lake, a profligate and reckless young officer. In the month of November, when the ship was cruising in the Caribbean Sea, and the crew had been placed on a short allowance of water, Jefl’rey, according to Captain Lake’s account, took “ a bottle with some rum in it ” from the gunner’s cabin; and on December 10th, by his own acknowledgment, got at a barrel of spruce-beer, intended for the captain’s own palate, and drew off about two quarts. A shipmate saw and informed against him.
Till: ill I" ll -TITI. IS THS omsa” (p- IS).
and Captain Lake ordered the 'i r.'i ant (,f tlio marine'- to " put hint on the black list."
< 111 llie lotll the II" i "It was passing the islet of Som-
brero, one of the Leeward group, about eighty miles to the south-west of St Christopher—a dreary and treeless lump of rock, with no springs or brooks, and uninhabited, except by the seafowl that roosted in its crags. After dinner that day Captain Lake came on deck, and his brain (which, it is charitable to suppose, was somewhat fuddled with drink) conceived an effectual punishment for the youth who had dared to meddle with his spruce-beer.
“ Lieutenant Mould,” he began, “ do you see that rock ? Lower the boat instantly; I’ll have no thieves on board my ship I Man a boat, and set the rascal on shore.”
With some little hesitation, expressed rather in manner than in words, the men lowered the boat; and Jeffrey was taken to the rock and landed, without shoes on his feet or any clothes than those on his back, and without even a
Digitized by
Google
154
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
biscuit for food. It was dark night before they set the poor lad ashore and unbound him. Observing that his feet were cut by the rocks, Lieutenant Mould gave him a pair of shoes which he had begged of one of the men, together with a knife of his own and the midshipman’s pocket-handkerchief for making signala But though it was necessary to make all haste back to the ship (for the captain in his present mood might easily hit on the freak of sailing off and leaving the boat’s crew behind as well), it was some time before they could summon sufficient sternness to disregard Jeffrey’s prayers and passionate entreaties.
Even after they had pulled away into the darkness, he could not at first bring himself to think that the captain meant to do more than intimidate him. AU through the night he watched, and to his inexpressible relief dawn revealed the Recruit stiU in the offing. But despair soon succeeded hope as he saw her going slowly from sight and vanish. Nothing was left before him now but the inhospitable rock and no less desolate ocean, studded with naked islands. Hunger grew with the morning hours, and a thirst intolerable. The islet abounded with sea-birds, whirling above him or perching on the rocks; but he had no gun, and they were too wary to be caught; and besides these nothing in the way of food presented itself. He discovered, indeed, an egg; but it was putrid, and sickened him, hungry as he was. The only sustenance he had, if such it could be called, was some bark which the waves had floated to the shore. The salt water, which after a time he was compelled to drink, allayed his immediate cravings, but only served in the end to make them more intense. He would doubtless have sunk speedily had not a shower of rain fallen. The few drops that collected in the crevices of the rocks he managed to get at by means of a quill Ships from time to time he saw—ships that hove in sight and disappeared again, though he waved his flag and screamed, leaving him, as our story does for the present, to his hunger and thirst, with the prospect of inevitable death.
. The Recruit, on leaving the island, steered for Barbados, to join the squadron under the command of Admiral Sir Alexander Cochrane. Almost at once the story began to leak out Whispered from crew to crew, and arousing indignation wherever it was told, it at length reached the Admiral’s ear. Sending for Captain Lake, he sternly reprimanded him for his brutality, and commanded him to return at once to the rock and rescue the poor wretch abandoned there.
Accounts vary as to the time that elapsed between the landing of Jeffrey on the islet and the return of the Recruit. In a narrative of the period, it is set down at two months; James puts the interval at one month; but a comrade of Jeffrey, who, having been impressed with him from the Lord Nelson, had witnessed the execution of the sentence, and went with the rescue party, tells us that little more than a fortnight passed before the Recruit was again off Sombrero.
Digitized by GOOQle
MAROONED!
155
The boats were manned and pulled with good will for the island. The crews leapt ashore and dispersed in search. They searched all that day and the two following days; but neither Jeffrey nor his body nor his bones could be found, nor any trace of him. A pair of trousers (not Jeffrey’s) and a tomahawk handle were the only vestiges of humanity discovered. At last they were forced to sail away frorp the island, in James’ words, “ until then little known except as a land-fall or point of bearing for navigators, but subsequently blazed about in every quarter of the globe, and never named without an execration upon the (must we say ?) British officer who had acted so inhumane a part.” The Admiral seems to have been satisfied that the unhappy youth had been rescued by some passing ship, and so let the matter rest.
The story, however, did not rest; it crossed the Atlantic, attracted attention at home, and even after two years had passed was agitated with so much spirit that Captain Lake was brought to a court-martial The court sat on board the Gladiator at Portsmouth on the 5th and 6th of February, 1810. Captain Lake admitted to landing Jeffrey upon Sombrero, but urged as his excuse “ that he thought the island was inhabited;" thereby not only exposing his own ignorance, but impugning the professional knowledge of his two lieutenants, and particularly of his master, of whom, as he admitted, he had to inquire the name of the island. The court found him guilty, and sentenced him to be dismissed from the British Navy.
Whilst this was passing, complete uncertainty existed as to Jeffrey’s fate, and the public would not be satisfied with anything short of his restitution, if alive, to his home and family; or the fullest inquiries into the particulars of ■bis fate. The newspapers were still loud on the subject of his wrongs; and m the House of Commons Sir Francis Burdett, then very popular, kept the case perseveringly before Government An order was given for the strictest search.
In this state of anxious uncertainty, some hope, qualified by doubt, was excited by a statement made on affidavit, before the Mayor of Liverpool, by one George Hassel, mariner, to the effect that he had seen at Beverley, in Massachusetts, a youth bearing the name, and answering to the description of Jeffrey. “ And the deponent further saith that this Jeffrey was well known in the neighbourhood of Marblehead and Beverley, and was generally called by the name of * the Governor of Sombrero,' it being notoriously known that he had been put on shore by the order of the captain of an English sloop-of-war.”
Other facts confirming Hassel’s statement came in from various quarters; and now a document was received which, though intended to set the public mind at rest, had, as it turned out, the precisely opposite effect of increasing the popular doubt. This was a letter containing an account by Jeffrey of all that had befallen him since the time of his abandonment on the rock. But the signature attesting its accuracy was found to be a cross, whereas the
Digitized by LnOOQle
156
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
missing man was known to have written a fair hand.* A letter from Jeffrey's mother, which appeared in the Times (October 4th, 1809), asserted her conviction that this statement was a fabrication of Captain Lake, or of people in his pay, and that someone had been suborned to personate her son. To settle the matter, a ship was despatched to bring him home, and he arrived at
“ COHN WALLIS OBASFED THE SITVATION ” (?. 158).
Portsmouth in October, 1810, three years after his adventure on the island of Sombrero.
Let us now conclude the account of Jeffrey’s stay on the desert rock. He had passed nine days in this solitude, when a vessel approached near enough to notice the handkerchief feebiy fluttering from tho piece of stick which he had scarcely strength enough to wave; and it was with a bounding heart that he
• Jeffrey afterwards explained this by saying that, having to sign the paper in the presence of ft large number of gentlemen, ho foil so nervous that he affixed a cross instead, of writing his name.
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE RESCUE.
157
saw a boat steering towards the rock. The boat belonged to the American schooner Adftntf. “He was,” says John Dennis, the master, “extremely reduced and exhausted, so as not to be able to speak.” But under the kind treatment of the crew of the Adama, he soon recovered. He was taken to Marblehead, where his story excited active sympathy. The people helped him; he took up his old trade of blacksmith again, and there lived quite ignorant of the interest taken in his fate by the British public, and (it must be added) culpably forgetful of the unhappiness his friends were suffering in his Cornish home.
On October 22nd he attended at the Admiralty, where he received his
GIBHALT All.
discharge, and had the R taken off his name, by which he became entitled to all arrears of pay; and he was at once taken, under the care of a naval officer, to Polperro, and delivered to his overjoyed relatives and friends. The villagers turned out and welcomed the lost one with music and banners, and “the meeting between the mother and her son,” writes a witness who had an eye for the sensibility of the scene, “ was extremely affecting and impassioned.”
Jeffrey wisely consented to forego further proceedings against Captain Lake on the payment of six hundred pounds. But there his wisdom ended. He was induced by a few traders in notoriety and some foolish neighbours to turn to profit the interest with which his adventures had for the moment clothed him. He proceeded to London, and exhibited himself on the boards of some of the minor theatres. For a time “Jeffrey the sailor” was one of the sights of the town. After a few months he returned to Polperro with money enough to
Digitized by
Google
158
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
purchase a small schooner, intended for the coasting trade. The speculation was unsuccessful; Jeffrey fell into consumption and died, leaving a wife and daughter in great poverty.	■
Flogging, of course, was the commonest punishment in the Navy. It was often ferocious, and often dealt out for offences that would have been amply punished by stoppage of the day’s grog. Five hundred lashes was not at all an unheard-of punishment, and the " cat ” itself was a terrible instrument of torture. “I would not,” says Dr. Stables, a surgeon of the Royal Navy, “use it on a bull unless in self-defence; the shaft is about a foot and a half long, and covered with green or red baize, according to taste; the thongs are nine, about twenty-eight inches in length, of the thickness of a goose-quill, and with two knots in each. Men describe the first blow as like a shower of molten lead.” We need not go into a description of the scene—old naval literature is full of such pictures—of the ship’s company gathered in the waist and gangways, the officers on the quarter-deck, the culprit lashed to a grating against the bulwark, with another grating under him, the small cup of water to help him through with the torture, the boatswain combing out the thongs with his five fingers, and the boatswain’s mates standing by with fresh “ cats ” in canvas bags. Perhaps the worst of the business was the captain’s irresponsibility with regard to the number of lashes. A vindictive man might go on ordering dozen after dozen, and only the surgeon could warn him to stop. All this is at an end in the Navy; but certain cases which crop up in the assize courts would seem to show that the lower class of merchant captains have not yet forgotten the brutality of the “good old times.”
They used to hang Jack, too, on a very small provocation—from the yardarm as the bow-gun fired, and while the yellow flag flew at the mast-head for the admiral’s ship. This was, of course, a natural punishment for mutiny ; but there were some among our captains, and among the best of them, who were chary of extreme severity even when mutiny threatened. While Sir James Saumarez commanded a squadron off the coast of Spain a spirit of mutiny broke out, and one of the ringleaders—a ship’s carpenter and a good seaman— was tried for his life. Saumarez sent for him, made a noble appeal to his better feelings, and dismissed him a loyal man, who afterwards did good service for his country in the battle of the Nile. Cornwallis, when captain of tho Canada, had to face a mutiny which arose in consequence of some accidental delay in the payments. The crew, in fact, signed a round robin, wherein they declared to a man that they would not fire a gun till they were paid. Cornwallis grasped the situation, and had his crew piped up on deck. “ My lads,” he said, “the money cannot be paid till we return to port; and as to your not fighting—why, I’ll clap you alongside the first large ship of the enemy I see, and then the devil himself can’t keep you from it!” This rough compliment was enough; the crew returned to their duties, almost as 'Well pleased as if they had extracted their pay.
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE ECCENTRICITY OF THE SERVICE.
159
With all their unlimited power and dignity, something like a rough-and-ready good-fellowship often existed between our best commanders and their crews, and their intercourse was sweetened by that eccentric humour which almost always grows on a man who has been long at sea. One day as brave Ketnpen felt (afterwards lost in the Royal George) was coining into port to have bis ship paid off, a sailor eyed with great earnestness a gold-laced waistcoat which the commander wore, and, stepping up to the admiral, begged in his best sea-fashion to know who made it. The admiral, catching the twinkle in bis eye, gave him the necessary information. Jack, going ashore soon after, applied to the admiral’s tailor, who, knowing the humours of his customers, went with him to buy the material, and at last asked what he would have the back made of. “Made of!” said Jack;“w'hy, the same as the front, be sure!” The tailor remonstrated, but in vain; so the waistcoat was made as ordered, and put on, with an old greasy jacket over it. A day or two after, coming down the High Street, the admiral met his man in this curious dress. But bis laughter was not a little increased when Jack, strutting up to him, removed his jacket and, showing his gold-lace back, exclaimed, “ See here, old boy, no false colours; stem and starn alike, by George ! ”
We observed that when Nelson went on shore at Gibraltar on June 20th, 1803, it was the first time he had set foot outside the Victory for two years. It happened, of course, to few captains to bo penned on board a ship such a stretch of time as this. But their cruises were quite long enough to develop that eccentricity of character which was as general in the Navy as it was peculiar to that service. To live much alone with no other horizon than the mu of the open sea is a sure means of emphasising those queer angles in a Man’s nature which really make up a " personality,” and are too surely worn smooth by much converse in the street and market-place. Nelson, we know, tank his coffin to sea with him-—the one within wdiich he sleeps now' in St. Paul’s. After the battle of the Nile ho had a number of presents sent him that were made out of the wreckage of the unfortunate I'Orient. His friend Hallowell, of the Swifteure, began to fear that all these compliments would do him harm ; and, just to remind the hero that he was mortal, ordered the ship's carpenter to make him a coffin entirely out of V Or lent'8 wood and iron. A handsome one was constructed out of her main-mast, and, being ready, was sent to Nelson with the following note:—
“Sir,—I have taken the liberty of presenting you with a coffin made from the main-mast of t Orient, that, when you have finished yonr career in this world, you may he buried in one of your own trophies ; but that that period may be far distant is the sincere wish of JW sincere friend "Bojamix Hallowell.”-
As the Swiften,re's boat, with the coffin on board, came alongside Nelson’s ship, the Vanguard, the crew cried out: “Now then, lads, look out for some hot work, for the admiral’s shipped his coffin.” And one of Nelson's first
Digitized by LnOOQle
160
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
cares before he left London for Trafalgar was to call at bis upholsterer’s, where the coffin was lying, and give orders that its history might be engraven on the lid, saying it was highly probable that he might want it on his return.
It is to be feared, though, that these long voyages were responsible for other eccentricities less amiable than those we have been mentioning; in particular for Jack’s proneness to have a wife in every port The improved marital
“ NO FALBB CCLOUBS ” (?. 159).
constancy of seamen of the British Navy is one of the many incidental effects of the discovery of steam locomotion. To Mr. Laird Clowes’ " All about the Royal Navy” we are indebted for a letter that illustrates Jack’s view of the case in the “ good old times.” It was written in the early days of the century by a fickle tar to his lawful wife at Truro:—
“ H.M.S. Edgar, at Plymouth Dock.
“ Mv dear Grace,—This coms with my kind love, hopine it will find you as it leves me. I hope if the child is a boy, you will call it after my name for my sak, and as i dozen intind never to see you agen, you may be married as son as you wil, for I shall be married as son as I can. So no mor at presant from your afectinate husbant."
Digitized by GOOQle
“DON'T FORGET PIGTAIL.”
161
And here is another illustrating his fondness for tobacco:—
“ Warren Ha»tin<i*, Eat Indymun ; off Gravesend,
“ 24 March, 1813.
' Drab Bbotbeb Tom,—This cums hopein to find you in good health, as it leaves me safe ankord here yesterday at 4 p.m. arter a plesant voyage tolerable short and few squalls. Pear Tom: hopes to find poor old father stout, am quite out of pigtail. Sights of pigtail at Gravesend, but unfortnitly not fit for a dog to chor. Dear Toni: Captain's boy will bring you this and put pigtail in his pocket when bort. Best in London at tho black boy in ’ diles, where go, acks for best pigtail, pound of pigtail will do, and am short of shirts. Dear Tom, as for shirts, ony took 2 whereof 1 is quite wored out and tuther most, but don’t brget the pigtail as I ant had nere a quid to chor never sins Thursday. Dear Tom, as for the shirts your size will do, only longer. I liks uin long, get one at present, liest at tower Hili and cheap, but be pecticler to go to 7 diles, for the pigtail at the black boy, and Dear Tom acks for pound best pigtail and let it be good, (.'aplain's boy will put the pigtail in bis pocket, he liks pigtail so ty it up. Dear Tom, shall be up about Monday there or thereabouts. Not so perticler for the shirt, as the present can be washed, but don't forget the pigtail without fail, so am your loving brother T.P.
“P.S.—Dont forget pigtail.”
11
Digitized by GOOQle
CHAPTER VIII.
LIFE IN THE ROYAL NAVY: AS IT IS.
How to Enter the Novy—Old System—Well-bora ‘■Cabin Boys’’—New System--The Britannia—Life of a Naval Cadet—Rising in the Service —Sir Rodney Mundy—Eccentricity of Naval Officers—The Spirit of the Service—A Seaman’s Career—Dr. Johnson on tho Sea—The Old Guard-ships—The Merchant Marino — H.1I.S. Patagonian — Routine on board Ship — Watches — Bells — The Ship’s Chaplain—And his Predecessors—Sir George Rooke and the Pai son—A Churchyard Revel—Captain St. Loe and the Bostonians—The Tables Turned—Blake and Killigrow—Engineers—Wages in the Navy.
Until after the close of the eighteenth century there was no regular and indispensable system of training for the “ young gentlemen ” who purposed to enter the Royal Navy. A boy might, and occasionally did, pursue a preliminary course of study at the Royal Naval College or elsewhere; but tho general practice was for the youngster to leave school at a very early age, and to go at once to sea under the patronage of some friendly admiral or captain. In those days every flag-officer and captain was permitted to take on board with him a certain number of persons who were rated as his servants: and an officer who desired to benefit a friend’s son would often rate him as a servant and, by carrying him afloat, enable him not only to gain experience, but also to spend in comparative comfort the years he was required to serve ere he could become qualified for promotion. This was the ordinary method. But the corruption of the times favoured very frequent departures from it: and it happened not uncommonly that, although a youngster was nominally borne on the books of one of His Majesty’s ships, he was in reality still in the nursery or at school on shore, and that he did not actually go to sea until he had been for months (or even for years) a member, by conventional understanding, of a sea-going ships company.
The fashion of thus sending young gentlemen into the Navy in capacities which they never really filled, was one of very ancient standing: and it has led, in modem times, to much misapprehension. For example, it has been assumed, because Sir Clowdesley Shove 11 entered with Sir John Narborough as a “cabin boy,” that the former was of low extraction and that his parents were extremely poor. It may be that such was the case. On the other hand, it is more likely that the Shovclls, in common with other people who knew naval
Digitized by Goode
ENTERING THE NAW.
1G3
officers in high position, utilised their opportunities in the usual manner and were quite content to see young Clowdesley rated as a “ cabin boy ” in return tor the solid advantages of supervision and instruction which were offered bv his patron. The truth is that many of our greatest sea commanders—including several of noble birth, large wealth, and family interest—entered the service in this way. Lord Cochrane,, eldest son of the ninth Earl of Dundonald, was rated only as “boy" when, in 1793, he went to sea in the Hind with his uncle, Captain the Hon. Alexander Cochrane. Lord Colville in 1775 began his naval career as “ servant ” to Captain Sir Charles Douglas, in the Isis. The Hon. Thomas Bladen (,'apel, a son of the fourth Earl of Essex, was in 1782 “servant” to Captain Waldegrave, afterwards Lord Radstock, in the Phaeton. Nelson himself, who, though not of noble family, was well connected and bad influential friends, was “coxswain” to Commander Skeffington Lutwidge in the Praise in 1773. Indeed, a captain who wanted to oblige a friend could always And a rating for a friend’s son. In time the son, if he behaved well and qualified, was made a midshipman; later, after he had passed an examination, he became eligible for promotion to the rank of lieutenant; but until after the beginning of the present century there was very little regular system. The young officer acquired his professional education as best he might: and although good services often won promotion, no one could be sure of getting ■m in the Navy unless he were so fortunate as to be the favourite or " follower ” of some officer of rank, or to have interest with a nobleman or a Minister. Such system as there was led to shameful abuses. In 1780, lord Rodney mods one of his sons a post-captain at the age of fifteen years mid five months; James Cook, the greatest of our navigators, was not even a commander until he was nearly forty-three. As may be expected, the general education of most officers left much to be desired. Taken afloat at the age of ten or eleven, the youngster seldom afterwards acquired much knowledge that was not of a strictly practical kind; and, subject to the rough and coarse influences of the gunroom, as it then was, he was lucky if upon reaching the ward-room ho still retained many of the characteristics of a gentleman. Captain John Perkins, sometime of the Drake, Arab, and Tartar, who was unable to write, and who could sign his name merely in a mechanical way, was not the only officer of his rank who, at the beginning of the century, had absolutely no polite education whatever. Nay, many officers openly despised all the conventions of social life, affecting to believe that decency of language, moderation of conduct, and even ordinary humanity, did not become a seaman.
To-day things are very different. Patronage? and favouritism still have some >iifluence upon the young naval officer's career, and the boy who desires to enter me service cannot do so without first obtaining a nomination as well as passing 4n examination. Nor is his advancement, up to the rank of post-captain, likely to be unfavourably prejudiced if he have a friend or two upon the admirals’ list, at the Admiralty, or in high political position. But Haring
Digitized by LnOOQle
164
THE STOBY OF THE SEA.
"jobs” are no longer perpetrated; and although it must be admitted that interest continues to be of use to good officers, it is not now true that interest, without merit, is sufficient to advance bad ones. Because of the necessity for obtaining nominations to cadetships, and because of tho fact that interest has not wholly ceased to influence promotion, the Royal Navy may be even now regarded as to some extent a “ close borough.” But tho adverse criticism which, upon this score, is often directed against it, is not wholly justifiable. Any fit and proper “young gentleman ” can, without very much difficulty, obtain the required nomination: and many who best know tho
a ownalusg lesson ox H.M.s. BBirisstA.	Roval Navy are
strongly of opinion that the high character of its executive officers could not be for long preserved if tho present system were wholly abandoned, and if cadetships were thrown open to simple, unrestrained competition. One of the results of the system is to encourage naval officers to send their sons into the service; and it is particularly desirable that they should do this as much as possible; for long family association with the Navy tends, moreover, to preserve and to promote naval esprit de corp*. Among the very numerous distinguished officers who	have	had	fathers, if not	grandfathers as well,	of high
rank in the Navy,	may	be	mentioned Sir	Charles Napier, Sir	Geoffrey
Hornby, Sir Thomas	Symonds,	Sir Alexander	Milne, Sir Hyde Parker, Sir
Peter Parker, Sir William	Martin, Sir Joshua	Rowley, Sir William	Rowley’,
Sir Arthur Fanshawe, Sir Charles Hamilton, Sir Edward Hamilton, Sir Graham
Hamond, Sir John Ommanney, Sir Edward Inglefield, Sir Edward Troubridge, Sir Fleetwood Fellow, Sir John Louis, Sir Houston Stewart, Sir Thomas Cochrane, Sir Arthur Cochrane, and Sir Thomas Harvey. These officers did not, we may be sure, serve the worse in consequence of having had fathers who had done great deeds of naval prowess, and who had written their names upon the pages of English history.
After having obtained his nomination and passed his examination in London, the cadet, who must be of not more than fourteen and a half, nor less than
Digitized by
Google
THE SMTAXSIA.
165
thirteen years of age, goes for a period of two years to H.M.S, Britannia, which is moored in the pleasant waters of the Dart.
The first Britannia to be utilised as a training-ship for naval cadets was the 120-gun three-decker which, built in 1820 at Plymouth, carried the flag of Vice-Admiral James W. D. Dundas at the bombardment of Sebastopol on October 17th, 1854. After returning to England she was laid up for several years in Portsmouth Harbour, but was recommissioned there as a training-ship on New Year’s Day, 1859, by Captain Robert Harris, one of her lieutenants
DfaTltrCTlON IN SEAMANSHIP ON H.M.S. Hlt/T.lXXLl.
being George S. Nares, who, many years later, won fame as captain of the Challenger on the celebrated scientific cruise; and of the Alert, which, with the Discovery, undertook the Arctic expedition of 1875-76. The ship remained at Portsmouth—a very unsuitable place for her—until 1862, when she was transferred to Portland. On September 17 th, 1863, under Captain Richard A. Powell, C.B, she was moved on to Dartmouth, and there, ever since, a Britannia has lain—but not the Britannia, for in 1869 the old ship became too infirm for her work, and the present vessel was substituted for her. The present vessel, one of the largest three-deckers ever built, was launched at Portsmouth in 1860 as the Prince of Wales, of 131 guns. By 1869
Digitized by GOOQle
166
THE STORY OF THE SEX.
-wooden vessels of that size had ceased to be used as men-of-war, and the Prince of Wales, being strong and in good condition, was relieved of her engines, and renamed Britannia,-, and has now for nearly a quarter of a century made an admirable successor to the old ship. Earlier Britannian, as Britannia cadets are fond of recollecting, took part in the victorious battles of La Hogue, 1692; Cape Spartel, 1782; St Vincent, 1797; and Trafalgar, 1805; as well as in a score of minor actions.
' The training-ship Britannia is an institution which has its counterpart nowhere in the world. It is an almost ideal place for a British boy, for it combines the discipline of a man-of-war and the teaching of a large staff of picked masters, or instructors, with the more captivating advantages of the privilege of wearing the Queen’s uniform:' plenty of healthy open-air life, afloat and ashore; the use, by those who can swim, of almost unlimited boats: the enjoyment of what is probably the finest playground in England; and such pure joys as spring from the enjoyment of a pack of beagles. For the Britannia is not exclusively a floating establishment It once was, but it speedily enlarged its borders, and attached to the ship there is now a beautiful estate of wood, water, stream, rock, and meadow on the Dartmouth side of the river, only a couple of hundred yards from the gangway of the great three-decker. On the immediate shore there are boat-houses and bathing-places; behind these there is a steep tree-covered slope; and at the rear of all, in a lovely park, there arc cricket- and football-fields, tennis-courts, the beagle-kennels, a private tuckshop, and the various “sancts.,” each of which is sacred to the cadets of a particular term. It is quite possible that unlawful orgies—even to the extent of smoking cigarettes—occasionally take place in these “ sanets,,” for there is much human nature even among cadets; but the general discipline and esprit <le corp* are admirable, and it is astonishing how the wearing of naval uniform modifies the natural wickedness of boys. “ Bounds ” are not drawn even at the confines of this park. There is a splendid country beyond, and there are further permissible tuck-shops; but the town is very properly tabooed. There are periodical examinations, failure to pass which renders a cadet liable to removal; but, all being satisfactory, the cadet at the end of his two years joins a sen-going ship, and commences his upward career, through the ranks of midshipman, sublieutenant, lieutenant, commander, captain, rear-admiral, vice-admiral, and admiral, to the supreme rank of admiral of the fleet. It is not given to everyone to pass to the last-mentioned pinnacle of honour. At a given moment there are about 425 midshipmen in the Navy. If even one of them should become an admiral of the fleet he will be exceptionally fortunate, for, as a rule, and roughly speaking, only one officer in 500 rises so high. But without becoming an admiral of the fleet, every officer in the Navy, by hard work and devotion to his duties, may make sure of attaining good pay, an assured social position, and a sufficient pension for the evening of his life. Moreover, he is able to retire at an age when he can still enjoy most of the pleasures of existence. So that.
Digitized by LnOOQle
EARLY TRAINING AND PROMOTION.
167
all things considered, the naval career may be regarded as both advantageous and honourable.
HEAPING THE SEXTANT ON H.M.K nRITANXlA.
It must not be imagined that either the genera! or the technical education of the young officer ceases when he goes to sea. Years ago it used to be continued in a spasmodic way by the ship’s captain, assisted by the gunner, the boatswain, and the carpenter, and perhaps by a friendly lieutenant; but now it is systematically carried out by a naval instructor, who is nearly always a university man, and very often also the chaplain. In vessels which carry midshipmen and cadets “ school is rigged ” every day when circumstances admit of such a thing, and the youngsters are instructed not only in mathematics, seamanship, navigation, and the other brunches of their profession, but also in most of the subjects usually taught at schools on shore. After having completed five years’ service in the Navy, and having attained the age of nineteen, after having also undergone a course of periodical examinations, the midshipman passes for lieutenant, and, as sub-lieutenant, is sent for further instruction to the Royal Naval College, whence he is required to pass out ere he can be promoted to be lieutenant. Nor does education cease even there. Officers up to and including the rank of captain undergo further courses of instruction at the College, at the Gunnery School at De von port, at Sheerness, or on Whale Island, and on board one of the torpedo schoolships lermm and Defiance, so that, in the ordinary course, a man is nearer forty- than thirty, and often nearer fifty than forty, ere he can be said to have finished his education as a naval officer.
His gradual rise in the service is marked not only by the excessive additions to and alterations of the gold lace on his uniform, and by- the changes in his commissioned rank, but also by the increasing comfort and consideration which he is enabled to enjoy-. For example, as a midshipman or acting sub-lieutenant afloat he makes his bed in a hammock, uses the top of his sea-chest as his dressingtable, and messes in the gunroom with the junior assistant-pay masters, the clerks and assistant-clerks, and the junior engineer officers,
His mess-subscription is
limited to 30s. a month, and his monthly wine-bill, if he be under eighteen, to 10s., and if he be over eighteen, but not a commissioned officer, to 15s. As a lieutenant he gains the important advantages of having a cabin to himself,
Digitized by
Google
168
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
sleeping in a bunk or bed, and messing in the ward-room, where he meets all officers who are superior to gunroom rank and inferior to the captain of the ship. There his mess-subscription is limited to £3 a month, and his wine-bill is subject to periodical scrutiny. As a captain he has two (or even three)
SEMAPHOHE ISSUKTIOJf OX H.M.S. BRITAXHIA.
cabins to himself, disposes of a staff of servants, and takes his meals in solitary state, unless it please him to invite one or more guests to be admirers of his magnificence. And as an admiral he has still more room and still more servants, and is allowed a grant of money in order that he may daily have his flag-captain, his secretary, and his flag-lieutenant. to keep him company at table. Indeed, the great glory and splendour of a British admiral in command are hardly to be understood by those who have not studied them at close quarters. He is the most absolute monarch on earth; he is regarded with awe, and often with real veneration, by everyone in the fleet; when he speaks all voices are still; when he sleeps all feet are muffled; and it is not astonishing that some admirals, after a long experience of the powers of command, become insufferable when, as private individuals, they settle down ashore. But good officers try to check this weakness of the flesh. Old Sir Rodney Mundy used to kneel down to his daily prayers in his shirt-sleeves. “It is right," he would say, 11 when I address my Maker, that I should endeavour to forget that I am Commander-in-Chicf at Portsmouth, an Admiral, and a K.CB.” Other naval
Digitized by
Google
THE POMP OF ADMIRALS.
ICO
officers employ their great power in fantastic ways. One captain, years ago, was in command in the West Indies of a sailing frigate with an auxiliary screw. While cruising, the screw was generally disconnected or hoisted up, and the ship was kept under sail alone. Consequently there was very little for the engineer officers to do. The captain noticed this, and therefore hade them keep watch and watch in the screw-alley, “ to prevent,” as he said, “ the devil from getting into their heads.” As keeping watch in the screw-alley was not only a useless, but also, in the tropics, a very sultry employment, the order was somewhat tyrannical. Another well-known captain was a great stickler for neatness and m enthusiastic lover of paint and soapsuds. Seeing some live fowls in the hencoop, where they were kept for the ward-room table, and where a longish voyage had not improver! their appearance, ho caused them to be all painted white, so as to match the boats and other things that lay on the booms. Stories such as these would be with difficulty believed of a landsman. In the Navy, where, as ve have seen, the life seems often to breed a certain grim eccentricity of diameter, stranger things have been done, even within the last few years, when it exciting any comment outside the service. Nay, many of our most able sea-commanders in all ages have been notably
POCKET-MONEY ON M.M.8. BB/TANXIA.
forms, which marks the typical sea-officer as distinct from other men; and nearly every sea-officer of superior rank has some share of it.
Are the officers of to-day better than those of the great period of our naval history ? The answer must unquestionably be—Yes.	They are better
Digitized by
Google
170
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
educated, better housed, better fed, better paid, more considerate, more contented, and, upon the whole, quite as enthusiastic in the pursuit of their profession. And it is not necessary to say much as to their maintenance of the ancient spirit of the service. In recent years they have had but few opportunities for the doing of heroic deeds; but they have had some, and they have never let an opportunity slip. The case of Lieutenant Myles H. Cooper may be cited:—In October, 1888, he was sent away in the steam-cutter of H.M.S. Griffon, and fell in with a slave-dhow, off Jondoni, cast coast of Africa. He closed with her and ordered her to lower her sail, and, as she paid no attention to him, he was about to attack her, when she opened tire. Lieutenant Cooper, William Ward, sailmaker’s mate, and Alexander Petty, caulker’s mate, were hit— the first mortally. “ Never mind me,” said Lieutenant Cooper to John Bray, ship’s corporal; " do your best.” Bray and the four unwounded men continued the action, and finally took the dhow; but Lieutenant Cooper died ere he could be brought back to the ship. Here is another case:—In June, 1887, the pinnace of H.M.S. Turquoise., in charge of Lieutenant Frederick F. Egan, was slave-cruising off Pemba, and a dhow attempted to run her down and board her. Lieutenant Egan rushed forward, shot two Arabs, ran a third through the body, and, though severely wounded, fought till the dhow broke clear. Three of his six men were wounded like himself, yet he chased the dhow, which presently capsized; whereupon he gallantly set to work to rescue her crew and slaves. And here is a ease of a different kind:—On August 28 th, 1891, the Balm a -cedists were making a last hopeless stand in the streets of Valparaiso. Vicuna, the Baimacedist leader, trained two machine-guns upon the inoffensive crowd, and would have massacred scores, had not Captain Adolphus F. St. Clair, of H.M.S. Champion, in company with some American and French naval officers, taken his stand before the muzzles of the guns, and so, at the risk of his life, prevented the weapons from being fired. Nor must one forget the cool courage that saved the Calliope in the Samoa hurricane, and that was equally displayed by all ranks: the gallantry of the officers and men of the Channel Fleet upon the occasion of the sinking of the Utopia, or the magnificent discipline of the doomed ship's company when, off Tripoli on June 22nd, 1893, the rammed Victoria turned bottom upwards and went down. AH these splendid results were the combined consequences of training, knowledge, and discipline; and some of them show that the seamen and marines of our Navy are worthy of their officers.
The life of a seaman in the modern Navy has been charmingly and truthfully described* by Mr. Thomas Holman, a gunner, R.N., who, writing as " A Ranker,” has given an account of his own career from the time when he entered on board H.M.S. St. Vincent, the training-school for boys at Portsmouth, about the year 1870, until 1889, when he served in a torpedo-boat
* “ Life in the Royal Navy.” By “ A Banki-r." (Chamberlain: Portsmouth, 1891.)
Digitized by LnOOQle
A SEAMAN IN THE R.N.
171
during the annual naval manoeuvres. He ran away from home at the age of eleven, hoping to be allowed to join the service, but was, ,of course, too young for the purpose. Subsequently he became a boy in the yacht Iona; and, finally, with his parents’ approval, he entered the Royal Navy in the regular way. For fifteen months he was in the St. Vincent, or in one of the trainingbrigs attached to her, getting up at 5.30 am. in summer, and turning in, wholesomely tired, at 9 p.m. Thence he was drafted to the guard-ship off Cowes, and at eighteen he became a "first-class boy.” A little later he went to the North American station, and joined a sloop as “ ordinary seaman.” Not long afterwards, thanks to his own application, he was rated as "able seaman.” Having given in his name to the first lieutenant as a candidate for “leading seaman,” he was one day unexpectedly sent for by that officer, who was smoking on the lee side of the quarter-deck.
“ Did you send for me, sir ? ” asked Holman.
“ Yes,” said the lieutenant; “ and by-and-by, when we are stripping the ship, if you should by any means be the last man at our main-mast head, and the last rope was to slip through your fingers, so that you could not use it to get down, tell me what you would do ? ”
Holman was happily not caught napping. “ I should take off my comforter, ar.” he said: “ unravel it, and let the end of the wool go slowly down to the fek, where they would fasten on a piece of twinq, whose weight would not break it, for me to pull up; and when the twine came to hand, something forger would be fastened at the bottom, and so on until I got the rope sufficiently large to lower myself down.” The lieutenant said that he had always heard of a stocking leing used for that particular trick, but, as he was of opinion that a comforter would do equally well, he passed Holman on the spot for “ leading seaman,” and added that ho should be glad to have him ns a petty officer in any ship in which he might in the future serve. Upon reaching home, Holman went for a course of gunnery instruction to H.M.S. Excellent, where be spent twelve months in 1877-78, and, having passed an examination somewhat more searching than that to which he had been subjected by the first lieutenant, became a “ seaman gunner.” He then made the celebrated cruise with the two Royal Princes in the Bacchante, passed for “gunner,” and at the age of twenty-six, with only eleven years’ sendee to his name, became an officer in Her Majesty's Navy, with pay, at the rate of £100 a year.
Mr. Holman's story", which is full of good reading, shows that the Navy offers a career not only to cadets, but also to capable, well-conducted boys in inferior ranks of life. The writer had had wide experience, had won three medals, had been thrice mentioned in despatches, and had once received the thanks of the Admiralty : so that his case must be regarded as an exceptional one; yet his verdict deserves attention not the less because he had been unusually fortunate. Should English people send their sons to serve their country as bluc-jaekcts in the Navy? Mr. Holman writes:—"I say ‘Yes,’
Digitized by GOOQle
172
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
emphatically ‘ Yes! ’ after a period of twenty years in its lower ranks. My school contemporaries may now be a bit ahead of me; but I doubt if many of them have extracted so much fun and enjoyment out of the last twenty years of life as I have done; and I am quite certain none of them have been happier, or more in love with their profession." Let it be remembered that a gunner's pay in the Navy may rise to £150, that he may receive an additional £27 a year when appointed for torpedo-duties, or up to £45 a year when
FftuH, by *1’. Grtifirry Jc Co., ^rowd.
MIDD1EK,
appointed for navigating duties; and that he may rise to the rank of chief gunner, with pay of £164 a year, and may ultimately retire on a pension of £150 at the age of fifty and assume the rank of honorary lieutenant Such a career is surely no unpromising one for a youngster who, like young Holman, is glad enough to bogin life as a “ cabin-boy or assistant to the steward ” of a small yacht. Some people will deem it a very favourable career, and may possibly be of opinion that very few available occupations on shore offer equally good prospects to the sons of labourers, artisans, and mechanics.
The Royal Navy does not, of course, consist solely of the officers and seamen of the “ executive " or fighting branch, nor even of these together with the Royal Marines, who, for many purposes, form part of the Navy. It also includes the now almost extinct branch of special navigating officers: the most important category of the engineer officers, who, with their artificers and stokers, may be said to carry out the least exciting, yet perhaps the most dangerous, part of th© work of the service; the chaplains; the naval instructors; the surgeons; and the
Digitized by
Google
“EGAS' HUSHED FORWARD' (p. KO).
Digitized by Google
174
THE STORY OF THE SEX
accountant officers or paymasters. Each branch has its own uniform, and is thus distinguished from every other: but a common spirit of loyalty to the country and to the service animates the whole body, and although, especially in some branches, there is a considerable amount of chronic grumbling, and a disposition to believe that the Empire does not do half enough for its servants, there is no room for doubt either that England has at her command to-day the finest body of naval officers and men that the world has ever seen, or that most of the grumbling that reaches the public ear is of a rather perfunctory character, and would cease in an instant if the country had again to send its fleets against a formidable enemy.
But if Smollett or Marryat tempted boys to sea, the temptations are infinitely greater to-day. Let us recall Dr. Johnson's words:—"A ship is worse than gaol. There is in a gaol better air, better company, better con-veniency of every kind ; and a ship has the additional disadvantage of being in danger. When men come to like a sea life they are not fit to live on land.” “ Then,” said Boswell, * it would be cruel in a father to breed his son to the sea ? ” Johnson : “ It would Ims cruel in a father who thinks as I do.” And on another occasion the Doctor thus delivers himself: “As to the sailor, when you look down from the quarter-deck to the space below, you see the utmost extremity of human misery; such crowding, such filth, such stench." Boswell: “Yet sailors are happy.” Johnson: “They are happy as brutes are happy, with a piece of fresh meat—with the grossest sensuality.” The Doctor had a vivacious way of putting things, but the picture is not stronger than that drawn by Roderick Random, whose description of H.M.S. Thunder, and of the sick men's quarters in particular, is perhaps the most squalid piece of word-painting in English literature. And long after Smollett’s day, the old guard-ships, used partly for breaking-in raw hands and partly as stopping-places for men waiting to join other ships, were little better than floating hells. The scum of the earth crowded into them. Human invention could not scheme work for the whole; while skulking, which found no place in other vessels of the Royal Navy, was deemed highly meritorious. Tlie men resolved themselves into two hostile classes, separated as any two castes of the Hindoos. A writer in Blackwood’s Magazine, more than fifty years ago, describes the first as sen-goers—i.e., sailors separated from their vessels by illness or temporary causes, or ordered to other vessels. These men looked on the guard-ship as a floating hotel, and, having, what they were pleased to call ship* of their own, were cocks of the walk, and would do no more work than they were obliged. The second, and by far the most numerous class, consisted of “waisters"—a name given to the simple, the unfortunate, or the utterly abandoned. The “ waister ” was held on board in the utmost contempt, and in general had but a rag or two on his back. He was forced to do everything on board that was menial—to swab, sweep, and drudge; and at night he too often became a bandit, prowling about seeking
Digitized by LnOOQle
TUE TRAINING-SHIVS.
175
what he might devour or appropriate. Contrast all this with the clean and orderly training-ships of to-day.
It was on February 9th, 1847, that Mr. John Lewis Ricardo moved in the House of Commons :—“ That a Select Committee be appointed to inquire into the operation and policy of the Navigation Laws.” His motion was carried by 153 to 61; and it was promptly declared by many persons of weight and authority that the Navy was doomed. A letter still exists, written by Sir John Gladstone, Bart., to his son, the Right Hon. W. Ewart Gladstone, then M.P. for the University of Oxford, in which the writer implores his dear son William w consider “ where will be your boasted nursery that has hitherto manned W Navy and protected your shores?” and also, “what is to become of your justly boasted wooden walls," if the barriers raised by the Navigation Laws are hAen down ? This letter, no doubt, represented an influential body of feeling in the country; but the Navigation Laws were repealed, nevertheless, in 1849.
More than forty years have passed, and the effect of that measure on our Mercantile marine is still a mutter on which very hot and very different opinions may be held. Into this we shall have to enter at some length when w discuss the history of our shipping interests. But, as far as the Navy is oteenied—and it was on the Navy that they laid most stress—the prophets Wre amazingly wrong.
Even those prophets would confess that no previous method of entering the ^wy (including that of getting knocked on the head in a tavern and hauled Wiseless aboard a man-of-war) compares favourably with modern service on ward a training-ship. Since these ships were established the number of men entered from other sources has been ridiculously small. These training-ships arc stationed at different points round the coast: H.M.S. BoncanTH, at Portland; ^•wy*, at Falmouth; Impregnable, at Devonport; Liun, at Devonport; St. ^•iieeat, at Portsmouth. And there the boys remain for a year before being *nt on sea-going ships. The age of entry has varied from time to time, but is now fixed between fifteen and sixteen-and-a-half years. Every boy must be wie to read and write, must bring with him a certificate that he is of proper *gc. and the written consent of his parents or guardians (or nearest relative if w he an orphan) to his entering the Navy and engaging to serve twelve years continuously from the age of eighteen. Ho must also satisfy the examining officer that he is of sound body and mind and of fair height and measurement. The recruiting statistics show that the great projection of those who make ‘ their heritage the sea ” still comes from the West of England, as it did in the days of Drake and Hawkins, Gilbert and Raleigh, and Grenville of the Revenge.
W hen a boy enters the service he receives gratuities of £5 for outfit and £1 for bedding; and on being rated a first-class boy he receives £2 10s. for clothing purposes. His pay is from £9 2s. Cd. to £10 12s. lid. a year, and of course he has a liberal supply of food. While on the training-ship he is allowed leave on full pay three times a year, and can send home money to
Digitized byVrOOQlC
176
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
his friends or guardians at the following rates:—Boys, first-class, 8s. a month; boys, second-class, 6s. a month.
Governments may be paternal, but are rarely benevolent at large, and the above excellent institutions are only organised for the safety and strength of
Photo. by W. Gregory d. Co,, Afrand.
ROYAL MAXINES.
the Navy. There is another class of training-ships, which owe their existence to benevolence, and deserve every encouragement—those for rescuing our street waifs from the treadmill and prison. A larger part of these do not enter the Navy, but are passed into the Merchant Marine. The Government simply lends the ship. Thus the Chichester, at Greenhithe, a vessel which had been lying useless for a quarter of a century—never having seen service—was in 1868 turned over to a society a mere shell or carcase, her masts, rigging, and other fittings having to be provided by private subscriptions. Her case reminds one of a vessel imaginary only in name, which was thus described by James Hannay:—“ H.M.S Patagonian was built as a three-decker at a cost of £12,000, when it was discovered that she could not sail. She was then cut down into a frigate, at a cost of £50,000, when it was found that she would not tack. She was next built up into a two-decker, at a cost of another £50,000, and then it was discovered she could be made useful. So the Admiralty kept her unemployed for ten years.” A good use was, however, found at last for the Chichester, thanks to benevolent people, the quality of whose mercy is twice blessed; for it both helps the wretched youngsters (some
Digitized by
Google
STEFS IN A SEAMAN'S PIIOGRESS.
177
of whom before their admission to the ship have hardly been tinder a roof at night for years together), and turns them into good seamen for our ships.
Other old vessels lent as training-ships for officers of the Mercantile Marine are the Conway (late Nile}, built 1839, in the Mersey; and Worcester (late Frederick William, and before that Royal .Frederick), built 1860, and lying off Greenhithe: but of the training and conditions of a sailor’s life in the Merchant sendee we must speak in another place.
A little work by a “ Sailor-boy,” * published some years ago, gives a very fair idea of a seaman’s lot in the Royal Navy. Passing over his admission to the training-ship, we find the boy's first days on board devoted to the mysteries of knots and hitch-making, or learning to lash hammocks, or rowing, or acquiring the arts of “ feathering ” and “ tossing ” an oar. Incidentally he gives us some information on the etiquette observed in passing a boat with an officer on board. “For a lieutenant, the coxswain only gets up and takes his cap off; for a captain, the boat's crew “lay” on their oars and the coxswain
Photo, by IF. (Jrtgury it Co. t Str amt. BLUE-JACKETS.
takes his cap off: and for an admiral the oars are tossed (i.e., raised perpendicularly, not thrown in the air!) and all caps go off.” Who would not be an
" A Sailor-boy’s Log-book from Portsmouth to Pciho.” Edited by Walter White. 12
Digitized by LnOOQle
178
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
admiral ? Together with this instruction he received his sailor’s clothes—a pair of blue cloth trousers, two pairs of white duck ditto, two blue serge and two white frocks, two pairs of white ‘‘jumpers,” two caps, two pairs of stockings, a knife, and a marking-type. He was then taught to go aloft, and began cutlass-drill, followed by rifle-drill, big-gun practice, instruction in splicing and all useful knots, and in using the compass and lead-line. In time he was sent on a brig for a short sea-cruise.
Dana, speaking of the incessant work on board any vessel, says, “A ship is like a lady’s watch-—always out of repair.” Even on a sailing-ship becalmed, with her sails hanging loose and no way on her, the men have enough to do in “setting up” the rigging, which constantly requires tightening and mending, in picking oakum for caulking; in polishing the metal-work; and in holy-stoning the deck. The holy stone is a large piece of porous stone dragged to and fro over the deck by a couple of sailors, sand being used to increase its scouring property. It gets its name from the fact that throughout the Merchant service Sunday morning is the usual time for a general clear-up.
The daily routine of our young sailor when cruising on the brig gave him plenty of employment. In his own words, it was as follows, beginning at 5 am.: '* Turn hands up; holy-stone or scrub upper deck; coil down ropes. 6.30 a.in. •—breakfast, half an hour; call the watch, watch below, clean the lower deck: watch on deck, clean wood- and brass-work: put the upper decks to rights. 8 a.m.—hands to quarters; clean guns and arms; division for inspection; prayers; make sail, reef topsails, furl topsails, topgallant sails, royals; reef courses, down topgallant and royal yards. This continued till eight bells, 12 o’clock, dinner one hour. All hands up again; cutlass, rifle, and big-gun drill till four o’clock ; clear up decks, coil up ropes; and then our day’s work is done.
But it is time we gave some explanation of the terms “ watches ” and “ bells,” and of the mode of reckoning them on board ship.
In even- ship, large or small, the whole of the crew is divided into two parts, or watches. Half form the starboard watch, and half the port watch. By this means half the men can be at work while the other half are off duty, either sleeping or at their meals, or what not In the same way the officers take watch and watch ; and whichever watch be on deck, the officer in charge is the “ officer of the watch.”
The day, as well as the crew, is divided into watches, a full watch being four hours. From 8 p.m. until 12 midnight is the first watch. From midnight until 4 a.m. is the middle watch; and from 4 a.m. till 8 a.m. is the morning watch. From 8 a.m. till noon is the forenoon watch; and from 12 noon until 4 p.m. is the afternoon watch.
Now comes a change: two watches of two hours each. From 4 p.m. until (i is the first dog-watch, and from 6 p.m. until 8 the second dog-watch. This makes up the twenty-four hours.
Digitized by LnOOQle
“WATCHES” AND “BELLS."
179
The object of these dog-watches is to make an uneven number of periods (seven instead of six), so that the men change the order of their watches daily. But for this contrivance it is clear that a man who on leaving port stood in a particular watch—say from 12 noon till 4 p.m.—would stand in that watch throughout the voyage; and be who had two night-watches at first would always have them.
Time on board ship is reckoned by “ bells.” Every four hours is divided up into bells of half an hour each. The limit is “eight bells," which are struck at twelve, four, and eight o’clock a.m. or p.m. The ship’s bell is sounded once for the half-hour and twice sharply for each hour. Thus, to express the stroke by signs, ha If-past twelve would be I (representing one stroke); one o’clock would Ife II (two strokes sharply struck, one close on the other); half-past one, II I; bro o’cliK'k, II II; half-past two, II II I; three o’clock, II II II; half-past dree, II II II I; and four o’clock, II II II II, or “eight bells.” The process is then repeated in the next watch, and the only disturbing clement is the weather, which occasionally, when the vessel rolls or pitches heavily, causes the tell to strike without leave.
A chaplain on board a man-of-war will now receive from about £220 to £400, according to his years of service. This important addition to the crew of our war-ships seems, from the following letter of George, Puke of Buckingham, to have been first adopted in the year 1626 :—
“The Duke of Buckingham to the University of Cambridge.
“After my hearty commendation!*. His Majesty having given order for preachers fa goe in every of his ships to sen, choyee hath been mnile of one Mr. Daniel Ambrose, Muster of Arts and Fellow of your College, to be one. Accordingly, mon signification to me ta come hither, 1 thought good to intimate unto you that His Majesty is so careful of such scholars as are willing to put themselves forward in so good actions, as that lie will expect— end I doubt not that you will accordingly take order—that the Raid Mr. Ambrose shall suffer Bns detriment in his place with you by this his employment; but that you will rather take care that he shall have all immunities and emoluments with advantage, winch have been Unnerly, or may be, granted to any upon the like service. Wherein, not doubting of your affectionate care, I rest, Your very loving friend, «
“York House, July 291/*, 1026."
And it must be admitted that in matters spiritual our seamen were sadly in need of care, though down to the time of the French wars it is doubtful if naval chaplains did much to further the good intentions of His Majesty King Charles I. On board ship in those days the chaplain was hardly expected to Ie more seriously minded than the surgeon or the purser. An anecdote of the Earl of Cloncartie is significant. In his early days he was cruising off the Guinea coast, when he hapjiened to lose his chaplain by yellow fever. The first lieutenant, a Scotsman, brought the news, and added, “ but I am sorry to inform your lordship that lie died a lloman C atholic.” “ Well, so much the Letter,” said his lordship. “ Hoot awa. sir I ” cried the Sect. “ How can ye say that of a Breetish clergyman ? ” “ Why,” replied the Earl, “ because I believe
Digitized byVtOOQIC
ISO
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
I’m the first captain of a man-of-war that can boast of a chaplain that had any religion at all.”
In fact, tho old English sea-dog showed little more respect to the Church than the foreigners. “What!” cried Lord Howe to a chaplain who objected to be employed on the watch at a shift—“ What' Cannot ye watch as well as pray I ”
Here is a story of Sir George Rooke: — Before he rose to the rank ot admiral he had served as captain of marines, and chanced to be quartered upon
“ ADMONISHED HIM " (p 182).
the coast of Essex, where the ague made great havoc amongst his men. The parson of the village was so harassed by the frequent necessity of performing the burial service, that at length he stoutly refused to bury any more of them without being paid the fee that he would receive for an ordinary parishioner. The captain made no words; but the next that died he ordered to be carried to the parson’s house and laid upon the table in the great hall. The clergyman gave in, revenging himself with the neat remark that “ if the captain would cause the body to be removed, he would never more dispute with him; nay, Ac would readily bury him and kin whole company for 'nothing.”
In the year 1779 a Mr. Constable, of Woolwich, happening to pass through the local churchyard at midnight or thereabouts, was astonished at hearing sounds of revelry among the tombs. Going nearer, he found a light sliming through the bars of a big family vault, and in the vault he discovered a party of drunken sailors regaling themselves with bread-and-cheese, beer and tobacco. They
Digitized by
Google
PRAYERS AT SEA, ON H.M.S. BLENHEIM.
Digitized by GOOQle
182 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
belonged, they told him, to the man-of-war Robuste, and had been drinking at an ale-house near until turned out by the landlord. They had then taken shelter in the vault, and in their drunken humour had prised open some of the coffins and had actually filled the mouth of one of the corpses with bread -and-cheese. Mr. Constable reasoned with them and persuaded them to start back for their ship; but as they staggered along, one of them, completely helpless with liquor, stumbled into the mud and was suffocated ; whereupon his comrades hoisted the body on their shoulders, staggered back to the vault, and shelved it amid the coffins there.
Nor was that exactly a Christian spirit displayed by Captain St. Loe, commander of a British man-of-war lying in Boston Harbour. He happened to go ashore on a Sunday, and was promptly arrested by the Puritan Bostonians for taiking a walk on the Lord's Day. On Monday he was haled before a justice and fined. Refusing to pay, he was clapped into the stocks, and there sat for an hour, while the colonists admonished him to respect in future the Godfearing ordinances of New England. The captain pulled his hat over his eyes and brooded on revenge. When the hour was up and he was liberated, he stood up, shook hands, and declared he was much edified by the discourse to which he had listened and the punishment he had suffered. The good people rejoiced in his conversion, which during the next few weeks they had every reason to think sincere. On the day fixed for the man-of-war to sail, he pressed them to partake of a farewell dinner on board; and they accepted.
The dinner was excellent. Food and drink were fast disappearing, and the elders enjoying themselves greatly, when a party of sailors entered the cabin, stripped and trussed them, carried them tip on deck, and tied them up for a whipping. “ When they had suffered the whole of the discipline,” says the story, “ which had flayed them from the nape of the neck to the hands, the captain took a polite leave, earnestly begging them to remember him in their prayers. They were then let down into the boat that was waiting for them, the crew saluted them with three cheers, and Captain St. Loe made sail.’
Of course, these anecdotes, while fairly representing the laxity of the old days in religions matters, do injustice to the minority of reverend men, a minority which included many of our greatest sailors. Blake was one. He was lying at Malaga with the English fleet when some of his men ridiculed the Host as it passed them in the street. The priest, incensed, excited the people to beat the sailors very severely. They complained to Blake, who sent a trumpet to the Governor, demanding that the priest should be sent on board to him. The Governor answered that " he had no power over the Church, and could not send him.” Blake sent a second message that he would not enter into the question of the Governor’s power, but if the priest were not on board within three hours he should destroy the town. The priest came and excused himself by representing the improper behaviour of the sailors. Whereupon said Blake, "If you had complained to me of this outrage, I would have punished
Digitized by GOOQle
THE ENGINEER.
183
the men severely; for I suffer nobody under my orders to affront the established religion of any place where I touch. But you are to blame for setting on a mob of Spaniards to beat them ; and I would have you and the whole world know that none but an Englishman should chastise an English -man.” Finer yet is a story of old Captain KiHigrew. He was cruising with six frigates in 1695, and fell in with a couple of French men-of-war. When Killigrew came up with one of them, the Content, the whole French crew were at prayers, and he might have poured in a broadside with great advantage. This, however, he refused to do. “ No, no,” he said. “ Bide a while. It is beneath the courage of Englishmen to surprise their enemies in such a posture,”
Although a distinguished French officer once said with a certain degree of truth that a sailor “ fortunately has no memory,” an amount of seriousness— due perhaps to the perilous nature of his calling—frequently underlies a sailor's character, and makes him particularly liable to religious influence. Tlie chaplain on a large modern ironclad or frigate has as many men under his spiritual care as the vicar of a country town or large village, and has many more opportunities of reaching them directly. The traditions of this noble service have greatly changed since the days of Lord (.Toncartie and Captain St. Loe; and the other day, when the Victoria went down, there was no one who set a finer example in the last few minutes, or whose conduct then was more of a piece with a noble life, than the Rev. S. 0. Morris, the chaplain and naval instructor of the ship.
Another officer of the Royal Navy—the engineer—deserves particular notice, for his position is becoming daily of more and more importance. He is not merely concerned with the care and working of the engines that propel the vessel; the chief and his subordinates have charge of various steam and hydraulic arrangements connected with the steering apparatus, of the electrical apparatus, mechanical arrangements of turrets and gun-carriages, pumping machinery, management of launches, torpedoes, etc. Their responsibility is, therefore, enormous; and yet they are only beginning to acquire the status and pay fairly due to them. Sir Walter Scott makes Rob Roy express “ his contempt of weavers and spinners and sic-like mechanical persons" and their pursuits; and in the naval service this feeling is only now dying out.
The first serious introduction of steam-vessels into the Royal Navy occurred about the year 1829; the Navy List of that year showing seven, of which three only were commissioned, and these for home ports. No mention is mr.de of engineers; they were simply taken over from the contractor with the vessel, and held no rank whatever. In 1837 an Admiralty circular conferred warrants on engineers, v:h<> were, to rank iramed intel;/ Mow ear pen tern. For assistance they had to depend on boys trained by themselves. Three years later the standard was raised, and they were divided into three classes. In 1842 a slight increase of pay was given, and they were advanced to the magnificent rank of
Digitized by
Google
184
THE STORY OF THE SEA,
ADM 1BAL, (Full Drew.)
* after captains’ clerks,” and were given a uniform, with buttons having a steamengine embossed upon them. In 1847 the Government found that the merchant and passenger lines took all the best men (the engineers' pay to-day is better on first-class steamship lines than in the Royal Navy); and they were forced to do something. The higher grades were formed into chief engineers, and they were given the rank of commissioned officers.
CAPTAIN AND FIRST-LIEU TENANT. (FnU brew.)
The first great revolution with regard to the use of steam in the Royal Navy took place in 1850, when the screw-propeller was first introduced. In that year Dupuy De L6me constructed the Napoleon, a screw vessel carrying 90 guns, and with engines of 900 horse-power, and England had to follow suit. Then came the Russian War, the invention of ironclad batteries, and finally the ironclad movement, begun in England in 1858 with the construction of the fftwrwr and similar vessels. The importance of the engineer has grown with each development in modern naval discovery. The dangers to which he is exposed, and the fearful risks he runs to serve his country, may be gathered from the story of the Victoria, already told. There is no doubt that his position should be more honoured than it is. At present engineer students
COWMAN DEB. (FttH Drew.)
are properly trained for four, five, or six years at Key ham, Devonport, and receive a pay that more nearly approaches their deserts. A chief engineer, R.N., now takes rank with a commander, and other engineers with lieutenants.
We may conclude this chapter with a tabic showing as nearly as possible the scale in the present day of full pay or wages (without extra allowances, etc.) of the principal ranks and ratings in the Royal Navy:—
LI EUTENANT. 01?r Eight Vtar*. {Full Dreas,) LIEUTENANT. Vader Eight Kefirs-(LrHdrwA)
Digitized by LnOOQle
FAY IN THE ROYAL NAVY.
185
Full Pay axd Wages in the Royal Navy.
The following are the annual rates of full |>ay or wages (without allowances, additional pay, etc.) of some of the principal ranks and ratings in the Royal Navy :—
LUVTESAST.
('	.)
Chief Inspector of Machinery £638 15
Inspector of Machinery ...	£547 10
Fleet Engineer | according j	£237 5
•Staff Engineer - to years • to
Chief Engineer J of service J £401 10
Engineer ............... £164	5 to £219
Assistant Engineer £109 10 to £136 17 6
•Secretary ..........£273	15 to £547 10
Fleet Paymaster । according |	£255 10
Staff Paymaster to years - to
Paymaster J of service J £602 &
Assistant Paymaster £91 5 to £209 17 6
Clerk.............................. £73
Assistant Clerk .......... £45 12 6
Inspector-General of Hospitals and Fleets .............. £1,003 15
Deputy-Inspector-General £766 10
Fleet Surgeon	... £492 15 to £602 5
Staff Surgeon	...	£383 5 to £438
Admiral of the	Fleet ............£2,190
Admiral ............................£1,825	|
Vice-Admiral	................£1,400	|
Hear-Admiral	...............£1,095
_	Commodore of	the First Class ... £1,095
|	Captain of the	Fleet ...........£1,095
£ Captain ...	£410 12 6 to £602 5
'	Commander........................ £365
; Lieutenant..........£182 10 to £255 10
|	Sub-Lieutenant .............. £91	5	0
Midshipman...................... £31	18	9
Naval Cadet .................... £18	5	0
Staff Captain ...................... £511
Staff Commander	,
Navigating Lieu-	I	according	1	,
tenant	-	toyears	^^	to
Chaplain	i	of service	J	*40	10
Naval Instructor	/
Surgeon ... £209 17 6 to £282 17 6 Chief Gunner, Chief Boatswain,
Chief Carpenter ...	£164 5
Gunner, Boatswain, Caqienter.
£100 7 6 to £150 11 3
Chief Petty Officer, £48 13 4 to £57 15 10
First-class Petty Officer,
£39 10 10 to £44 2 1
Leading Seaman .............. £31	8 9
Able Seaman ................. £28	17 11
Ordinary Seaman...........	£22 16 3
Boy ............. £9	2 6 to £i0 12 11
Chief Engine-room Artificer,
£123 3 9 to £136 17 6 Engine-room Artificer,
£95 16 3 to £118 12 6
Stoker ... £30 8 4 to £36 10 0
In almost all the above cases, large additional pay or wages, and, in certain circum-‘tances, liberal allowances, may be drawn for special services and qualifications. There are, moreover, rates of half and reserved pay, pensions, and retiring allowances, full particulars mcerning all of which, and of the pay of the Royal Marines, may be found in the pages of the official quarterly Naval List.
” ith allowances, extra pay, etc., the higher ranks of the service earn, of ' 'ttrse. much more than this; in some cases about twice as much. An admiral, for instance, on home command, will receive between £3,420 and £•1.967, this sum not only including his pay, but table money, allowance in *eu of servants, etc. A vice-admiral (according to where he serves) will get from £2,555 to £3,102; a rear-admiral from £1,642 to £2,737. A captain,
Digitized by LnOOQle
186
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
whose pay ranges (as the table shows) from £410 to £602, will receive extras <>f from £91 to £125.
It must be remembered that naval ranks stand relatively higher than military ranks of corresponding names. Thus a sub-lieutenant in the Navy ranks with a lieutenant in the army; a naval lieutenant under eight years’ standing with a captain in the army, and of eight years’ standing with a major in the army; and a naval captain with a colonel in the army. But there is this difference between the two services (and the reader must form his own opinion of the wisdom that allows this difference to exist): though it cannot lie said of the British army, as of the French army under the great Napoleon, that a possible marshal’s baton was in every soldier’s knapsack, yet it is possible for a man to enlist as a common soldier and attain respectable commissioned rank, especially if his breeding and
(iFktte Undreu.) (White m<h v^irtu.) manners be gentle. In the English Navy, on the other hand, if a man enters the
service as a common sailor, he may indeed rise to be a warrant officer, but can never hope to tread the quarter-deck as a commissioned.
Digitized by LnOOQle
CHAPTER IX.
MUTINIES AND MUTINEERS.
The Other Side of the Question—The Sailing of the Bounty—in Matavni Bay—The Bread-fruit—In Utos Land—Bad Symptoms—Mutiny—Cust Off—Time of Trial—Land at Lust—More Trials— Saved —Tho Mutineers — The Wreck of the Pandora — Court-Martial — Pitcairn Island — The Descendants of Fletcher Christian—Jack’s Troubles—The Mutiny at Spithead—The Mutiny at the Note—Richard Parker—The Delegates—The Collapse—Lord Dunean—The Last of the Mutiny.
TITE have been speaking cheerfully of our sailors, as indeed we have a right ’' to do. We know what their gallantry has been, and we have reason for reliance on their present discipline : but it is well to look at the other side of the picture. Just a hundred years ago, when England stood on the threshold of the greatest epoch of her history, the discipline of the Navy was sapped and undermined, and the whole service seemed rotten to the heart. By good fortune the hour found its man—a man of heroic remedies. In the popular mind Nelson ”111 remain the first of English admirals. He had genius, a beautiful courage, a (‘haracter picturesque even in its failings, and that personal charm which made him the darling alike of his own sailors and the “ man in the street” Lord St A incent had few of these qualities. One is apt to conceive of him as an unamiable old martinet, with a slightly Judaic twist of features. For a time, no doubt, he was the best-hated man in the Navy; but his work for England, though ungrateful enough, and not of a sort to captivate public enthusiasm, was as great and as solid as Nelson’s, Indeed, just as the victory of Trafalgar made Waterloo but a question of time, it was itself made possible mainly by the moral courage of this one man.
Before telling the story of 1797, however, we will go into the circumstances of the mutiny almost as famous (or infamous) which happened some eight years previously, and one from which the naval service may still draw an important lesson.
In the year 1787, being seventeen years after Captain Cook’s memorable first T°y®g®f a number of merchants and planters in London memorialised King
Digitized by LnOOQle
188
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
George III. that the introduction of the bread-fruit tree into the West Indies from the Southern Pacific Islands would be of great benefit to the inhabitants. The king complied with their request. A small vessel, the Bounty, was purchased and fitted out under the eye of Sir Joseph Banks, President of the Royal Society, who had been with Cook in his voyage among these very islands, and, indeed (so report said), had actually got himself tattooed in his zeal for acquiring knowledge. The ship was put under the command of Lieutenant
UTAH BITE.
(From a F’ptdftMj by IFiHiam Hodges, who d'Wrripanied Cuj'Miu Cwt.)
Bligh, who had also sailed with Cook; and her officers and crew numbered forty-four souls, to whom were added a practical botanist and assistant
The Bounty sailed from Spithead on December 23rd. 1787. On the 26th she was caught by a severe gale from the eastward, which blew for three days and obliged her to put in at Teneriffe and refit. On January 10th they set sail again, made the coast of Terra del Fuego on March 23rd, and encountered tremendous weather off Cape Horn. This weather lasted for nine days, with incessant hail and sleet: the ship required pumping every hour; the decks leaked so much that the great cabin was allotted to those who had wet berths to hang their hammocks in. At last, after thirty days’ st niggling to make headway, it was determined to bear away for the Cape of Good Hope. The hehn was accordingly put a-weather, to the great joy of everybody on board.
They reached the Cape late in May; remained there thirty-eight days to replenish their stock of provisions and water: sailed on July 1st, and on October 26th cast anchor in Matavai Bay, Otaheite (or, as it is now spelt, Tahiti), after running a distance of 26,000 and odd miles since leaving Englund. The natives immediately came out to the ship in great numbers. Tinah, the
Digitized by LnOOQle
PRESENTS FROM THE CHIEF.
189
chief of Matavai, on hearing of the English man’s arrival, sent a small pig and a young plantain-tree in token of friendship, and the ship was liberally supplied with provisions. Handsome presents were made to Tinah, and he was told that they had been sent to him on account of the kindness of the people to Captain Cook during his visit. “ Will you not, Tinah,” said Bligh, " send something to King George in return ? ” “ Yes,” answered Tinah, “ I will send him anything I have ; ” and then enumerated a list of articles, among which he mentioned the bread-
fruit This was just what Bligh wanted. Tinah was told that the bread-fruit trees would please King George very much, and the chief promised that a large number should be sent on board.
The importance of the bread-fruit to these people cannot be overstated. That old navigator Dampier had well described it # hundred years before. “The bread-fruit,, as we call it, grows on a large tree, as big and as high as our largest apple trees ; it hath a spreading head, full of branches and dark leaves. The fruit grows on the boughs like apples: it is as big as a penny loaf when wheat is at five shillings a bushel; it is of a round shape, and hath a thick, tough rind; when the fruit is ripe, it is yellow and soft, and the taste is sweet and pleasant. The natives of Guam use it for bread. They gather it when full-grown, while it
‘‘TINAH * . . 8EST A hMALL ri(J AM) A VuLAG PLANTAIN-TREE ” Q)- 1S9),
is green and hard; then they bake
it in an oven, which scorcheth the rind and
makes it black, but they scrape oft'
the outside black crust and there remains
Digitized by^OOQlC
190	THE STORY OF THE SEA.
a tender thin crust; and the inside is soft, tender, and white.” The fruit lasts in season eight months. During Lord Anson’s two months’ stay at Tinian, no ship’s bread was consumed, the officers and men all preferring the bread-fruit Perhaps tho best description of this fruit and the different modes of preparing it is to be found in Melville's fascinating “ Typee,” and his chapter is enough to bring water into the mouth of any European. “In the article of food," writes Cook on his first visit to Otaheite, “these people may almost be said to be exempt from the curse of our forefathers; scarcely can it be said that they earn their bread with the sweat of their brow: benevolent nature hath not only supply'd them with necessarys, but with abundance of superfluities.” And Cook’s prose is echoed by Byron’s verse—	.
“The happy shores without a law,
Where all partake the earth without dispute, Aad bread itself is gathered as a fruit;
Where none contest the fields, the wood, the streams, The gold-less age, where gold disturbs no dreams.’’
The Otaheitans, though sadly to seek in morality, as we understand it, were in	'
those days a most harmless, amiable, and unsophisticated race. One day the	4
gudgeon of the cutter’s rudder was missing, and was believed to have been	t
stolen. “ I thought,” says Bligh, “ it would have a good effect to punish the	J ,
bo at keeper in their presence, and accordingly I ordered him a dozen lashes. * All who attended the punishment interceded very earnestly to have it mitigated: the women showed great sympathy.” The intercourse between the crew and the natives was most pleasant. In the evenings the whole beach was like a parade, crowded with several hundred men, women, and children, all in the best of humours; their sports and games were continued till near dark, when they peaceably returned to their homes. They were particularly cleanly, bathing every morning, and often twice a day.
There is not the least doubt that Bligh made a fatal mistake in this long stay of over five months, during which the crew had all opportunities of leave ashore. Every- man of them had his tayo, or native friend. From tho moment he set foot on land, he found himself in the midst of ease, plenty, and happy idleness—temptations all too many for a common sailor. But also, there is not the least doubt, though ho carefully conceals it in his narrative (which has too often been taken as a fair and trustworthy statement), that Bligh was a liar, a sneak, and a bully, and that his petty offensiveness had at least as much to do with the events we have to relate as the allurements of beautiful Tahiti. Omens of trouble to come were not wanting. One morning the small cutter was missing, with three of the crew. They had taken with them eight stands of arms and ammunition. The master was despatched with one of the chiefs in pursuit: but before they had gone far they met the boat with five of the natives, who were bringing her back to the ship. The native chiefs promised
Digitized by
Google
“OMENS OF TROUBLE."
191
Bligh to use every effort to catch the deserters and bring them back also : and in a few days some islanders did manage to seize and bind them, but let them loose again on a promise that they would return to the ship. This promise they did not exactly fulfil, but gave themselves up at length, when they found the search growing hot. A few days after this, the cable by which the ship rode was found to be cut close to the water’s edge, so that it held only by a
strand. Bligh believed that this had been done by one of his own people,
who wished to cast the
THE BREAD-FRUIT.
ship aslm. so that they might remain at Otaheite : it may. however, have chafed accidentally.
1t was not until April 4th, 178*1 Bounty
wiled away from Otaheite, having taken on board over a thousand of the bread-fruit plants, besides other shrubs and fruits. Bligh was congratulating himself on his ship being in good condition, his plants well packed, and all his men and officers in good health and discipline. On April 27th they were between the islands of Tofoa and Kotu in the Friendly group; and, before leaving deck that evening, the captain had given directions as to the course and watches.
Just before sunrise, while he was still sleeping, one Fletcher Christian, officer of the watch, with three of the men, entered bis cabin, seized him, tied his hands behind his back, and threatened him with instant death if he dared to speak or make the least noise. Bligh, however, called out as loud as he could, in hopes of assistance; but the mutineers had already s^’
Digitized by'
Google
192
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
the other officers by placing sentinels at their doors. They had, moreover, obtained the keys of the arm-chest, and Christian was armed with a
cutlass, and the others with muskets and bayonets.
Bligh was now hauled
out of bed, and forced on deck
in his shirt, suffering considerably from the tightness of the cords about his hands. The master and master’s mate, the gunner and the gardener, were confined below, and the forecastle hatch was guarded by sentinels. The boatswain was ordered to hoist the launch out, and told to do it smartly or look out for himself; and Mr. Hayward and Mr. Hallet, two of the midshipmen, and Mr. Samuel, clerk, were ordered into it. “ What do
THE BREAD-FRUIT TREE.
you mean by this ? ” asked Bligh. The only answer he got was, “ Hohl your tongue, sir, or you are dead this instant! ” “I continued,” says he, “ my endeavours to turn the tide of affairs, when Christian changed the cutlass which he had in his hand for a bayonet that was brought to him, and, holding me with a strong grip by the cord that tied my hands, he threatened, with many oaths, to kill me immediately, if 1 would not be quiet; the villains round me had their pieces cocked
and bayonets fixed.”
The boatswain and seamen who were to be turned adrift with Bligh were allowed to collect twine, canvas, lines, sails, cordage, and an eight-and-twentygallon cask of water; Mr. Samuel secured a hundred and fifty pounds of bread, a small quantity of rum and wine, and a quadrant and compass; but was forbidden to touch the maps, observations, sextant, time-keeper, or any surveys 'rowings. He did, however, secure the journals and captain’s commission.
Digitized by LjOOQle
BLIGH IS SENT ADRIFT.
193
The mutineers having forced those of the seamen whom they meant to get rid of into the boat, Christian directed a dram to be served to each of his own crew.
After the unpopular seamen, the officers were called upon deck and forced over the side into the boat; Bligh meanwhile being still kept imder guard abaft
" THMEATEXED ... TO KILL Ml” (JJ, 192).
the mizzen-mast. Isaac Martin, one of his warders, had an inclination to serve him, and fed him with some fruit, his lips being quite parched. This kindness was observed, and Martin was ordered away. The same man, with three others, desired to go with the captain, but this was refused. They begged him to remember that they had no hand in the business. Much altercation went on among the mutinous crew during the whole affair. Some swore, " I’ll be hanged if he does not find his way home if he gets anything with him”; and when the carpenter’s chest was being carried past, “ Bless my eyes' he will have a vessel 13
Digitized by
Google
194 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
built in ft month.” Bligh begged for firearms, too, but was laughed at; in the end, however, four cutlasses were tossed into the boat.
The officers and men being now embarked, Christian said, “ Come, Captain Bligh, your officers and men are in the boat, and you must go with them. If you attempt to make the least resistance, you will instantly be put to death." Bligh (according to his own account) asked if this treatment was a proper return for the many instances Christian had received of his friendship? At this question Christian (still according to the same account) was much disturbed, and answered with emotion, “ That—Captain Bligh—that is the thing; I am in hell—I am in hell ■ ’’
Of this we may believe as much as we like. It was shown afterwards that. Christian had, only the night before, determined to make his escape on a kind of small raft; that he had informed four of his companions, that they had supplied him with part of a roast pig, some nails, beads, and other trading articles, and that he abandoned the idea because, when he came on deck to his watch at four a.m., -he found an opportunity which he had not expected. He saw Mr. Hayward, the mate of his watch, fall asleep, and the other midshipmen did not put in an appearance at all He suddenly conceived the idea of the plot, which he disclosed to seven of the men, three of whom had “ tasted the cat" and were unfavourable to Bligh. They went to the armourer, and secured the keys of his chest, under the pretence of wanting a musket to fire at a shark, then alongside. Christian then proceeded to secure Lieutenant Bligh, the master, gunner, and botanist. He stated that he had been much annoyed at the frequent abusive and insulting language of his commanding officer. Waking out of a short half-hour’s disturbed sleep, to take the command of the deck—finding the mates of the watch asleep—the opportunity tempting, and the ship completely tn his power, with a momentary impulse he darted down the fore-hatch way, got possession of the arm-chest, and made the hazardous experiment of arming such of the men as he deemed he could trust. It is' said that he intended to send away his captain in a small, wretched boat, worm-eaten and decayed, but the remonstrances of a few of the better-hearted induced him to substitute the cutter.
At any rate, Bligh was now forced over into the boat, which was veered astern. A few pieces of pork were thrown in; and after undergoing a great deal of ridicule the boat’s crew was at length cast adrift in the open sea, while the ship shook out her sails and steered away to the W.N.W. As she went Bligh heard shouts of “ Hooray for Otahcite ! ” again and again repeated, until they died away in the distance.
In the boat, well weighted down to the water’s edge, were nineteen persons, including the commander, master, acting-surgeon, botanist, gunner, boatswain, carpenter, and two midshipmen. On the ship were twenty-five persons, mostly able seamen, but three midshipmen were among the number, two of whom had no choice in the matter, being detained there against their wills.
Digitized by LnOOQle
Digitized by
Google
*fr
•‘BLIGH . . . CUT THE HOPE QUICKLY' (p. 195).
Digitized by^OOQlC
FROM TOFOA TO TIMOR.
195
And now let us follow the fortunes of Bligh and his companions. Their first step was to examine their provisions, which they found to be 150 Iba of bread, sixteen pieces of pork, each piece weighing 2 lbs., six quarts of rum, six bottles of wine, and twenty-eight gallons of water. Being near the island of Tofoa, they resolved to row thither and seek extra supplies of bread-fruit and water. They made the island soon after dark; but the shore proved to be steep and rocky, and without anchorage, and they had to wait until morning to find a landing. All they could obtain from the natives, however, was a few cocoa-nuts, with a small supply of bread-fruit. Moreover, the natives, seeing their defenceless condition, speedily began to crowd the beach, knocking stones together, the preparatory signal for an attack. Seeing this, the Englishmen walked quickly back to their boat, not showing their trepidation, but in a silent kind of horror. The surf was running high With great difficulty they succeeded in getting their things together, and all the men into the boat, except John Norton, one of the quartermasters, who had run up the beach to cast the sternfast off. While he was doing so, the signal was given, the natives rushed upon him in a moment, and the poor fellow was stoned to death before the eyes of his comrades. His assailants at once got hold of the stern rope, and would have hauled the boat ashore in a trice had not Bligh whipped a knife from his pocket and cut the rope quickly. As it was, they pushed out to sea in hot haste, every man being more or less hurt by the showers of stones. Several canoes were pushed off in pursuit. The only expedient the Englishmen could think of to gain time was to throw overboard some of their clothing, which the natives, fortunately, stopped to pick up. Night fell while they were thus occupied, and the canoes returned to shore.
They had now no hope of relief, unless they could reach Timor, a distance of full twelve hundred leagues, and this in an open boat only twenty-three feet in length, and deeply laden with eighteen men. The men agreed to be put on an allowance, which on calculation was found not to exceed one ounce of bread a day and a gill of water. It was about eight o’clock at night, on May 2nd, that they bore away under a reefed lug-foresail; and, the people being divided •oto watches, and the boat got into a little order, they returned thanks to God for their miraculous preservation.
^ext morning, the sun rose fiery and red, a sure indication of a gale; and by eight o’clock it blew a violent storm, the waves running so high that their . actually becalmed between the seas, though at the top of the seas could not have been set for the force of the wind. They could not, however, th to take in the sail, being in very imminent danger, the sea curling over oj the bon). anj obliging them to bale for dear life. They lightened rope- ' tlrowmS overboard all superfluous clothes, with some spare sails and i i ^^ Removing the tools to the bottom of tho boat, stowed the bread, on fhoroi h ^^ exist®11®® depended, in the carpenter’s chest As they were all ” ‘v wet and cold, Bligh served out a tea-spoonful of rum to each. The
Digitized by
Google
196
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
sea still rose, and the fatigue of baling became very great At daylight on the 4th the men’s limbs were benumbed, and another spoonful of spirits was given. Their dinner that day consisted of live small cocoa-nuts and a few broken pieces
of bread-fruit By the morn-
HUGH WAS SOW FOKCED OVER INTO THE BOAT"’ (p, 19(1.
ing of the 5th the gale running among some islands; but after their reception at Tofoa they did not venture to land. On examination, a great part of their bread was found damaged and rotten; but even this was carefully preserved for use. On the 6th they still continued to see islands in the distance ; and this day, for the first time, to their great joy they hooked a fish, but were miserably disappointed by losing it as they were trying to get it into the boat. They were sadiy cramped for want of room, though Bligh did his best by putting them watch and watch, so that half of the men could lie down in the bottom of the boat. On the
7 th they passed by close to some rocky islets, from which two large sailing canoes came out and pursued hotly, but gave over the chase in the afternoon. This day heavy rain fell and everybody set to work to catch some, with such success that they not merely quenched their thirst.
but increased their stock to thirty-five gallons. As a corresponding disadvantage they got wet through. On the 8th the allowance issued was an ounce and a half of pork, a tea-spoonful of rum, half a pint of cocoa-nut milk, and an ounce of bread. Bligh constructed a pair of scales of two cocoa-nut sheiks, using
Digitized by
Google
SUFFERINGS OF THE BOATS CHEW,
197
pistol-balls for weights. The next nine days brought bad weather and much rain, the sea breaking over the boat so much that two men were kept constantly baling, and it was necessary to keep the boat before the waves to prevent her tilling. When day broke it showed a miserable set of beings, full of wants, aches, and pains, and nothing to relieve them. They found some comfort by
‘ HKTWUS THE
(p. 195)
wringing their clothes in sea-water, by whi h means they found a certain limited amount of warmth. But though all were shivering with cold
and wet, the commander was obliged to tell them that the rum ration—one
tea-spoonfid—must for the present be discontinued, as it was running low.
“During the whole of the afternoon of the 21st,” says Bligh, “we were so covered with rain and salt water that we could scarcely see. We suffered extreme cold, and everyone dreaded the approach of night. Sleep, though we longed for it, afforded no comfort; for my own part, I almost lived without it. • ■ ■ The misery we suffered this night exceeded the preceding. The sea flew over us with great force, and kept us baling with horror and anxiety. At
Digitized by LnOOQle
198
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
dawn of day I found everyone in a most distressed condition, and I began to fear that another such night would put an end to the lives of several, who seemed no longer able to support their sufferings. I served an allowance of two tea-spoonfuls of nun; after drinking which, and having wrung our clothes, and taken our breakfast of bread and water, we became a little refreshed.” On the 24th, for the first time in fifteen days, they experienced the warmth of the sun, and dried their now threadbare garments.
On tho 25th, at mid-day, some noddies flew so near the boat that one was caught by hand. This bird, about the size of a small pigeon, was divided into eighteen portions, and allotted by the method known as " Who shall have this?” in which one person, who turns his back to tho caterer, is asked the question, as each piece is indicated. This system gives everyone the chance of securing the best share. That and the following day two boobies, which are about as large as ducks, were also caught. The sun came out so powerfully that several of the people were seized with faintness. But the capture of two more boobies revived their spirits, and as, from the birds and other signs, Mr. Bligh had no doubt they were near land, the feelings of all became more animated. On the morning of the 28th the “barrier-reef” of what was then known as the eastern coast of New Holland, now Australia, appeared, with the surf and breakers outside and smooth water within. The difficulty was to find a passage; but at last a fine opening was discovered, and through this the boat passed rapidly ■with a. strong stream, and came immediately into smooth water. Their past hardships, seemed all at once forgotten. The coast appeared, and in the evening they landed on the sandy point of an island, where they soon found that the rocks were covered with oysters and that plenty of fresh water was attainable. By help of a small sun-glass a fire was made, and soon a stew of oysters, pork, and bread was concocted, which gladdened their hearts, each receiving a full pint The 29th of May being the anniversary of the restoration of Charles II., they called the spot Restoration Island, a name not inapplicable to their own case of recovered health and strength.
Bligh soon noted the alteration for the better in the looks of his men, which proved the value of oysters stewed, as they sometimes were, with fresh green palm-tops. Strange to say, a mutinous spirit, which had been satisfactorily absent before, broke out in a few of the men. “ One person,” says Bligh, “ in particular went so far as to tell me, with a mutinous look, that he was as good a man as myself. It was not possible for me to judge whero this might have an end if not stopped in time; therefore, to prevent such disputes in future, I determined either to preserve my command or die in the attemptSeizing a cutlass, I ordered him to take hold of another and defend himself on which he called out that I was going to kill hkn, and immediately made concessions. I did not allow this to interfere further with the harmony of tho boat's crew, and everything soon became quiet.
Digitized by LnOOQle
THEY REACH TIMOR.
199
But although tho worst of their voyage was over, their troubles in other wavs were serious. While among tho islands of the coast of Australia, several of the men suffered greatly from weakness, dizziness, and violent pains in their bowels. Very small doses of wine were given, to their great benefit. A party was sent out on one of tho islands to catch birds, and they returned with a dozen noddies; these and a few clams were all they obtained. On the 3rd of June, after passing several islands and doubling Cape York, the northernmost portion of Australia (or New Holland, as it was then called), the little boat and her crew once more launched out into the open ocean. On the 5th a booby was caught by the hand, and the blood divided among three of the men who were weakest, the bird being kept for next day's dinner. On the "th the sea ran high, and kept breaking over the boat Mr. Ledward, the surgeon, and Lebogue, an old and hardy seaman, appeared to be breaking up fast; but no other assistance could bo given them than a tea-spoonful or two of wine. On the morning of the 10th there was a visible alteration for the worse in many of the people. Their faces were hollow and ghastly, their limbs swollen and all extremely weak; some spent all their time in a sort of stupid doze, and seemed to have lost their reason. One hope alone supported them, that in a few hours, at the rate they were then sailing, they would see the land of Timor ahead. From the afternoon of the 7th, birds and floating branches of trees gave signs of land being near. On the 11th Bligh was able to announce that they had passed the meridian of the eastern end of Timor. All eyes were fixed on the horizon ahead. Evening fell without their being able to discover anything on the vast expanse of ocean; but, at three o'clock on the following morning, as day broke, a cultivated coast, finely diversified with hili and woodland, appeared in wide extent before them. Timor at last ■ Forty-one days they had been on the ocean in their miserable boat; by the log they had run 3,618 nautical miles; and, notwithstanding their extreme distress, without tho loss of a single life since poor Norton was killed at Tofon.
The crew, who now considered their safety assured, were eager to land at the nearest shore; but Bligh considering that the Dutch held but a corner of this large island, steered towards the south-west part of it, in which he had a vague recollection of hearing that the Dutch were settled. And, about two o’clock on the 13th, after running through a dangerous sen, they came to a spacious bay with an entrance so convenient for shipping that they hoped it might be an European settlemem. Seeing a hut, a dog, and some cattle near a sandy beach, the gunner and boatswain landed, and soon returned with five natives from whom they had met with a hospitable reception. These men informed Bligh that the governor lived at Coupling, some little distance to the north-east, and one native went with them to show the way; but, tho wind falling light, they came to a grapnel at ten o’clock. Next morning, “after the most happy and sweet sleep that ever man enjoyed,” they weighed and continued to move east; and soon the report of two large guns came
Digitized by LnOOQle
200
THE STORY OF THE SEA,
booming along the water. They were electrified with joy by this, the first sound of European existence; and shortly after two square-rigged vessels and a cutter appeared at anchor. They now took to their oars and rowed till daybreak, when they found themselves opposite the small fort and town of Coupang. Among the odds and ends which had been thrown into the boat before it was cut adrift from the Bounty was a bundle of signal flags; and with these in the course of the voyage Bligh had made a small jack, which he now hoisted
A SOUTH SKAS' LAGOON.
and tears of joy and gratitude running down their starved
in the shrouds as a signal of distress. The sun was scarcely up before a soldier hailed them from the shore and told them to land, which they did at once amid a crowd of Indians, who stared, as well they might, at this crew of spectres; their bodies skin and bone and covered with sores; their hair long and unkempt; their clothes in rags;
cheeks. Almost
the first person they met on shore was an English sailor, belonging to one of the vessels in the road, commanded by Captain Spikerman, the second
person in the town. This captain, as well as the governor, received the party with the greatest hospitality; but the strain had been too much for several of them. The botanist died at Coupang, three of the men at Batavia, and
one of them on the passage home, which they made partly in a little schooner
purchased by Bligh and partly in the Van^ittart packet. The doctor was left behind, and not afterwards heard of. Bligh reached England on March 13th,
and received much sympathy; he was at once promoted to the rank of commander, and a second time sent out to transport the bread-fruit to the
West Indies, which he successfully did.
Digitized byurocele
THE PANDORA IS SENT OUT,
201
Meantime the Government naturally proposed to bring the mutineers to trial, whatever it might cost. To this end the Pandora frigate, of twenty-four guns and one hundred and sixty men, was sent out under the command of Captain Edward Edwards, with orders to proceed to Otaheite and, if necessary, the other islands in pursuit of the delinquents.
The Pandora passed the Straits of Magellan in January, 17!)I, and came to anchor in Matavai Bay, Otaheite, on the 23rd of Marell. The Bounty's
“THIS chew or specthes” (p 200).
am Hirer, Joseph Coleman, put off for the ship almost before her anchor dropped: he was followed immediately by Mr. Hev-Wood and Mr. Stewart, midshipmen, and soon after by four others of the Bounty’s crew. These readily gave Captain Ed-wards information. It app irs that Christian and mm men had long since left Otaheite in the Bounty; but that the
rest of the mutineers,
Digitized byTooele
202
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
having built a small schooner, had only the day before sailed out of Matavai Bay, meaning to settle somewhere in the north-western part of the island. Hearing this, Captain Edwards sent off the pinnace and launch in chase. The schooner was secured at Papara, but the mutineers had fled to the mountains. In a day or two, however, they ventured down, and when within hearing were ordered to lay down their arms, which they did, and were carried off in irons to the Pandora. Here Captain Edwards put them in a round-house, built on the after-part of the quarter-deck, in order to isolate them from his crew. According to the statement of one of the prisoners, the midshipmen were kept ironed by the legs, separate from the men, in a kind of round-house, aptly named “ Pandora’s Box,” which was entered by a scuttle in the roof, about eighteen inches square. “ The prisoners’ wives visited the ship daily, and brought their children, who were permitted to be carried to their unhappy fathers. To see the poor captives in irons,” says a narrative of this visit, “ weeping over their tender offspring, was too moving a scene for any feeling heart. Their wives brought them ample supplies of every delicacy that the country afforded while we lay there, and behaved with the greatest fidelity and affection to them." Stewart, the midshipman, had married the daughter of an old chief, and they had lived together in the greatest harmony. On hearing that Stewart was confined in irons, Peggy (as her husband had named her) put her child— a beautiful little girl—into a canoe, and paddled off in the greatest distress to the ship. The interview was so painful that Stewart begged she might not be allowed on board again. Forbidden lo see him, she sank into the deepest dejection, refused all food, and pined away and died two months afterwards.
Of the sixteen mutineers who were left at Otaheite, fourteen were now secured. The other two, Churchill and Thompson, had perished by violent deaths. They had made friends with the chief, and Churchill had become his tayo, or sworn friend. The chief died suddenly without issue, and Churchill, according to the custom of the country, succeeded to bis property and dignity. Thompson soon afterwards shot Churchill, probably to acquire his possessions, and was in turn stoned to death by’ the natives, who brought his skull to the Pandora.
Captain Edwards learned that after Bligh had been set adrift, Christian had thrown overboard the greater part of the bread-fruit plants, and divided the property of those they had abandoned. They at first went to an island named Toobouai, where they intended to form a settlement, but the opposition of the natives, and their own quarrels, determined them to revisit Otaheite. There the leading natives were very curious to know what had become of Bligh and the rest, and the mutineers invented a story to the effect that they had unexpectedly fallen in with Captain Cook at an island he had just discovered, and that Lieutenant Bligh was stopping with him, and had appointed Mr. Christian commander of the Bounty; and, further, he was now come for additional supplies for them. This story imposed upon the simple-minded
Digitized by LnOOQle
FATE OF THE PANDORA.
203
natives, and in the course of a very few days the Bounty received on board thirty-eight goats, 312 hogs, eight dozen fowls, a bull and a cow, and large quantities of fruit. They also took with them a number of natives, male and female, intending to form a settlement at Toobouai. Skirmishes with the natives, generally brought on by their own violent conduct or robberies, and eternal bickerings among themselves, delayed the progress of their fort, and it was subsequently’ abandoned, sixteen of the men electing to stop at Otaheite, and the remaining nine leaving finally in the Bounty, Christian having been beard frequently to say that his object was to find some uninhabited island, in which there was no harbour, that he would run the ship ashore, and make use of her materials to form a settlement. This was all that Captain Edwards could learn, and after a fruitless search of three months he abandoned further inquiry, and proceeded on his homeward voyage.
Off the east coast of New Holland, the Pandora ran on a reef, and was speedily a wreck. In an hour and a half after she struck, there were eight md a half feet of water in her hold, and in spite of continuous pumping and baling, it became evident that sho was a doomed vessel. With all tho efforts made to save the crew, thirty-one of the ship’s company and four mutineers were lost with the vessel. Very little notice, indeed, seems to have been taken of the latter by the . captain, who was afterwards accused of considerable inhumanity. “ Before the final catastrophe,” says the surgeon of the vessel, "three of the Bounty's people, Coleman, Norman, and M'Intosh, were now let out of irons, and sent to work at the pumps. The others offered their assistance, and begged to 1» allowed a chance of saving their lives; instead of which, two additional sentinels were placed over them, with orders to shoot any who should attempt to get rid of their fetters. Seeing no prospect of escape, they betook themselves to prayer, and prepared to meet their fate, everyone expecting that the ship would soon go to pieces, her rudder and part of the stern-post being already beaten away.” When the ship was actually sinking, H is stated that no notice was taken of the prisoners, although Captain Edwards was entreated by young Heywood, the midshipman, to have mercy on them, "hen he passed over their prison to make his own escape, the ship then lying on her broadside with the larboard bow completely under water. Fortunately, the master-at-arms, either by accident or, probably, design, when slipping from the roof of “Pandora’s Box" into the sea, let the keys unlocking the handcuffs and irons fall through the scuttle, and thus enabled them to commence their own liberation, in which they were assisted by one brave seaman, William Moulter, who said he would set them free or go to the bottom with them. He wrenched away, with great difficulty’, the bars of the prison. Immediately after the ship went down, leaving nothing visible but the top-mast cross-trees.
Hore than half an hour elapsed before the survivors were all picked up by the boats. Amongst the drowned were Mr. Stewart, the midshipman, and three others of the Bounty's people, the whole of whom perished with the
Digitized by LnOOQle
204
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
manacles on their hands. Thirty-one of the ship’s company were lost The
four boat-loads which escaped had scarcely any provisions on board, the
allowance being two wine-glasses of water to each man, and a very small
quantity of bread, calculated for sixteen days.
Their voyage of 1,000 miles on the open ocean, and the sufferings endured, were similar to those experienced by Bligh’s party, but not so severe. After staying at Coupang for about three weeks, they left on a Dutch East Indiaman, which conveyed them to Samarang, and subsequently Batavia, whence they proceeded to Europe.
After an exhaustive court-martial had been held on the ten prisoners brought home by Captain Edwards, three of the seamen were condemned and executed; Mr. Heywood, the midshipman, the boatswain's mate, and the steward were sentenced to death, but afterwards pardoned; four others were tried and acquitted. It will be remembered that four
others were drowned at the wreck.
Twenty years had passed away, and the Bounty, and Fletcher Christian, and the piratical crew he had carried off with him in that ship, had long ceased to occupy a
thought in the public mind when a Captain Folgar, of the American ship Topaz, reported to Sir Sydney Smith at Valparaiso that he had discovered the last of the survivors at Pitcairn Island, the southernmost of the southern
islands in the Low Archipelago. Tho information was transmitted to the Admiralty, and received on May 14th, 1809; but the troubles of those times prevented any immediate investigation.
In the autumn cf 1814 H.M.S. Briton, commanded by Sir Thomas Staines,
Digitized by LnOOQle
“WON’T YOU HEAVE US A HOPE NOW?”
205
with the Tagus, Captain Pipon, was cruising in the Pacific, and on September 2nd left the Marquesas and steered to the southward, intending to make the port of Valparaiso, In the second watch of the night land was unexpectedly discovered, and disclosed to them a fertile shore, varied with huts and cultivated ground; and on the beach a gathering of people, among whom there appeared an alacrity
than the
The
people were making
much greater usual to hail Europeans.
“ THE OLD MAS CAME DOWS TO MEET THEM " (JO. US).
signs, launching their little canoes through the surf, and pulling towards the ship with a most eager dispatch. The captain was mustering the few Tords of the Marquesan tongue which he had picked up to hail them with, when, to the utter amazement of himself and all present, a voice called out in good English, “ Won’t you heave us a rope now ? *’
The voice went on, “What is the ship’s name?” And, on receiving an answer, added, “ Who is the commander ? ” A regular intercourse now began,
Digitized byVtOOQIC
206
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
and the visitors were invited on board. They seemed quite at their ease and under no apprehension; but the crew were still lost in wonder when one visitor asked, “ Do you know William Bligh in England ? ” Then they knew they were on the point of clearing up the mystery of the Bounty. The question was instantly put, " Do you know one Christian ? There is his son coming up in the next boat; his name is Thursday Fletcher October Christian; his father is dead now.” Question was still following question when young Christian stepped on board; a tine youth of about twenty-four, full six feet high, with almost black hair and a very frank and handsome countenance. He wore no clothes except a piece of cloth round his loins and a straw hat, ornamented with black cocks’ feathers; and his figure and well-shaped limbs attracted general admiration. He told them that he was the son of the late Fletcher Christian by an Otaheitan mother; that he was the first born on the island ; and that he received his odd name because he came into the world on a Thursday in October. He was now married to a woman much older than himself, one of those who had accompanied his father from Otaheite.
In the cabin, where the visitors were offered refreshments, one of them astonished the captains by asking the blessing with much appearance of devotion, “ For what we are going to receive, the Lord make us truly thankful.” The only surviving Englishman of the crew was John Adams, and when the captains landed through the surf, with no worse result than a good wetting, the old man came down to meet them. Both he and his aged wife were at first considerably alarmed at seeing the king’s uniform, but was reassured when he was told that they had no intention of disturbing him. Adams said that he had no groat share in the mutiny, that he was sick at the time, and was afterwards compelled to take a musket He even expressed his willingness to go to England, but this was strongly opposed by his daughter. " All the women burst into tears, and the young men stood motionless and absorbed in grief; but on their being assured that he should on no account be molested, it is impossible,” says Pipon, “ to describe the universal joy that these poor people manifested.”
It appeared that when Fletcher Christian reached Pitcairn Island from Otaheite he could find no good anchorage; so lie ran the Bounty into a small creek against the cliff, in order to get out of her such articles as might be of use. Having stripped her, he set fire to the hull, lest she should be seen by passing vessels and his retreat discovered. Bligh's report of Christian’s language nt the time of the mutiny—“ Captain Bligh, I am in hell!”—may or may not be true; it was at least well invented. After reaching Pitcairn Island, the mutineer seems to have fallen into a state of sullen and morose dejection. His manner to his companions became uncertain and tyrannical; and at length he was shot, while busy in his yam plantation, by an Otaheitan whose wife he had forcibly seized. This was the signal for a general rising of the Otabeitans, who were incensed at the preference shown for the Europeans by the females
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE PITCAIRN ISLANDERS.
207
of the little colony. The English were surprised and overcome; two were killed, and John Adams tied, wounded, to the woods. A tragedy still darker followed. The women, who had been indignant spectators of this conflict, banded together, rose in the depth of the night and, like the daughters of Danaus of old, murdered in their sleep their unsuspecting husbands and countrymen.
In this dreadful manner Adams and a few surviving English were saved. Yet we are assured that out of this abyss of horror there arose a new race, tearing no taint of the guilt from which it sprang. We are told that at the time of the Britons visit the colony comprised forty-six persons, mostly grownup young people, all of prepossessing appearance. The girls were modest and bashful, with bright eyes, beautifully white teeth, and “ engaging air of simple innocence and sweet sensibility.” They carried baskets of fruit over such roads and down such precipices as were scarcely passable by any creatures except goats, and over which we could scarcely scramble with the help of our hands. John Adams (we are told) had made up for any share be may have had in the revolt by instructing them in religious and moral principles; and was in consequence adored by the little community of which he was the head. When Captan Beechey, in his famous voyage of discovery on the Bloxom, called at Pitcairn Island in 1825, ho found Adams, then in his sixty-fifth year, dressed ia a sailor’s shirt and trousers, doffing his hat and smoothing down his bald forehead whenever ho was addressed by the officers of the Bloxom. Adams died in 1829; but the model colony still exists, and several visits have been paid to it during the last few years. It has, moreover, been whispered that these virtuous islanders are as fine a race of hypocrites as the circuit of the world contains. This is probably an over-statement; but it is difficult to shake off the uneasy suspicion that John Adams and his pupils must have exchanged A solemn wink as soon as Sir The mas Staines in 1814, and Captain Beechey m 1825, were well below the horizon.
The mutiny just described sinks into insignificance beside the two great mutinies of which wc are about to tell—the mutinies of Spithead and the Nore. We have already seen something of Jack’s treatment in the good old times; but may add a word or two here upon his particular grievances at tho beginning of the year 1797. That these grievances were real enough may be gathered from the fact that, at one point in the story of that year, no less than forty thousand men were concerned in the mutiny, while the disaffection spread to many stations, some of them far abroad.
To begin with, the pay of the sailor had remained unchanged since the reign of Charles II., although the cost of necessaries and the commoner luxuries of life had greatly risen. The rate of his pension, too, was unchanged, though that of the soldier had risen. In the matter of provisions he was worse oft' than the ordinary pauper. He was in the hands of the purser, who
Digitized by LnOOQle
208
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
in those days was often a man of very low rank and the very lowest business morality. The food supplied was abominable in quality; while as to quantity, fourteen instead of sixteen ounces went to the navy pound. The purser usually retired on a competency after a life spent in swindling, without scruple and without limit, the defenders of liis country7, who, had they received everything they were entitled to, would still have been poorly paid. His meanness extended even to such details as shortening Jack’s allowance of grog by the insertion of the purveyor’s thumb into the pannikin. Moreover the discipline of those days was specially severe; and although such brutes as Captain Hugh Pigot of the Hermione were not common, simply because humanity does not commonly descend to those depths, there was nothing in the traditions of the service to discourage them. And as one evil breeds another, the state of things on board obliged the captains to be constantly refusing leave ashore, when in harbour, for fear of desertion. Finally, the custom of admitting criminals into the navy might have been specially designed to bring all these discontents to a head “ It is notorious,” says James, “ that a custom had long prevailed for the London police, when a culprit possessed wit enough for his roguery just to elude the letter of the law, rather than discharge him that he might commit fresh depredations upon society, to send him on board a ship of war. He was generally a plausible fellow, with a smattering of learning and a knowledge of the world; two qualities that ranked him very high in the estimation of the unsophisticated sailor. He sang a good song, or at all events he told a good story7, and became in time the oracle of the forecastle, . , . He was perhaps a dabbler in politics, and certainly, from the nature of his profession, * a Lit of a lawyer.’ He therefore could expound Acts of Parliament to the sailors. In doing this, he read what he pleased, and explained how he pleased; told them where they were wrong, and pointed out how they might get redressed.” James might have added that England at this time was sown with secret societies, the offspring of the French Revolution, and all opposed to monarchy. Members of these societies were convicted in numbers and, with fatal blindness, sent to sea as a punishment These men became, of course, the natural ringleaders of mutiny. In the case of the mutiny at Spithead, about to be recounted, the sailors exhibited an amount of information and an organisation that might have been expected from “ sea lawyers ” rather than jack tars ; while that political agents were busy in the more serious rebellion at the Nore was clearly established.
On the 15th of April Lord Bridport, who had just taken over command of the Channel Fleet from Lord Howe, received orders at Spitbead to put to sea immediately. He at once threw out the signal to prepare for sea; when, instead of weighing the anchor, the seamen of the Royal Georye ran up the shrouds, manned the yards and rigging, and gave three cheers. These cheers were taken up and echoed from vessel to vessel of the fleet; and in every vessel the yards and rigging were soon crowded with the crews. The captains and
Digitized by LnOOQle
“ORDERED HIS OFFICERS TO FIRE ON THE MUTINEERS” (p. 211).
14
Digitized by LnOOQle
210
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
officers, who knew, of course, that disaffection existed, but were taken completely aback by this sudden declaration, tried their utmost to persuade the men to return to their duty, but without the least success.
The men, in fact, were justly indignant As far back as the latter part of February Lord Howe had received sundry petitions from them; but as none of these were signed, and most of them written by one hand, no notice was taken of them for the time. Subsequently, however. Lord Howe, who was in bad health, directed Rear-Admiral Lord Hugh Seymour to find out whether or not any discontent did really exist in the fleet Lord Hugh, being the kind of person designed by nature to make discontent as dangerous as possible, of course answered that there was little or none. Whereupon the different petitions were packed up and sent to the First Lord of the Admiralty, Earl Spencer, who took no notice of them, in the most approved Admiralty manner.
The seamen now, having shown their common determination, proceeded to take command of each ship from the officers. No violence was used. The first lieutenant of the London, ordered by Admiral Colpoys—one of the best hated officers in the sendee—did indeed shoot one of the mutineers, but the man's death was not avenged. Next day, April 16th, the ships’ companies appointed two delegates apiece, who met to deliberate in the state, or flag-officer’s cabin of the Queen Charlotte. On the 17th every man in the fleet was sworn to support the cause of the sailors. Ropes were then reeved, in terrorem, at the fore yard-arms of each ship, and the more unpopular of the officers were ordered ashore. On the same day the delegates drew up two petitions, one to Parliament, the other to the Admiralty, and both respectfully worded They prayed that the wages of the seamen should be increased; that their provisions should be raised to the weight of sixteen ounces to the pound, and be of a better quality; that their measures should be the same as those used in, ordinary trade; that vegetables, instead of flour, should be served with fresh beef; that the sick should be better attended to and their necessaries not embezzled; and that the men, on returning from sea, might have a short leave to visit their families. They desired, they said, “ to convince the nation at large that they knew where to cease to ask, as well as where to begin: and that they had asked nothing but what was moderate and might be granted without detriment to the nation or injury to the service.”
■ The Admiralty higgled, of course. The men, owing to' the clear justice of their claims and the temperate use of their power, had the nation at their back. But time after time they had to decline the Admiralty’s proposals and declare that unless their demands were conceded by Act of Parliament, and the King’s pardon granted to the whole fleet, the men would not lift an anchor : unless, indeed (they had always excepted this), the enemy's fleet should put to sea. This quiet avowal so incensed Vice-Admiral Sir Alan Gardner, who had. como with Admiral Colpoys—suitable couple I—to confer with the delegates, that
Digitized byVrOOQlC
THE MUTINY AT SPITHEAD.
211
he seized one of them by the collar, and swore he would have them all hanged, together with every fifth man in the fleet. The men’s prompt answer was the loading of all their guns. Admiral Gardner withdrew, and in his stead came Lord Bridport, with the announcement that he had brought with him a redress of all their grievances, and the King’s pardon for the offenders. He made the men an energetic speech; the men returned cheerfully to their duties; and for the time the mutiny was over. -
It was resumed on May 7 th, by which time the ships had dropped down to St Helen’s. The Government had delayed in passing the measures for the increase of pay and pensions; and the seamen, suspecting that they were to be tricked after all, rose again and disarmed all their officers. Vice-Admiral Colpoys, on the London, ordered his officers to fire on the mutineers, with the result that five men were killed and six others badly wounded. The crew, in retaliation, seized the first lieutenant, Mr. Peter Turner Bover, and were proceeding to hang him, when the Vice-Admiral interfered, asserting that he bad fired upon instructions received from the Admiralty. These instructions the seamen demanded and obtained. They thereupon ordered Vice-Admiral Colpoys, Captain Griffith, and the rest of the officers to their cabins; and on the 11th packed the Vice-Admiral and Captain ashore, together with the Reverend Samuel Cole, the ship’s chaplain. Many other ships followed the London's example in setting their more offensive officers ashore. Matters continued thus till the 14th, when Lord Howe came posting down from London wth full powers to settle the dispute; bringing with him an Act of Parliament, which had been passed on the 9 th, agreeably to the wishes of the men; also a proclamation, granting the King’s pardon to all who should at once return to their duty. Lord Howe, always popular with the men, and their especial hero after his great victory of the 1st of June, 1794, had little difficulty in restoring order. At 7 p.m. on the 15th his work was done and he returned to Portsmouth, the delegates carrying him shoulder high to the Governor’s house. The men again returned to duty. Tire Plymouth fleet, which had followed that of Portsmouth into the mutiny, did the same; and within a month of the first outbreak the disaffection of these two fleets was at an end.
As we have said, the mutineers at Spithead had a largo amount of public sympathy to back them. That the tyranny of their officers had been intolerable may be judged from the fact that Lord Howe sanctioned the removal of over one hundred of these officers in a fleet of sixteen ships. But this sympathy was neither accorded nor deserved in the case of the mutiny at the Nore, which broke out in the very week in which the men at Spit head returned to their duty.
The chief ringleader at the Nore was one Richard Parker, a scoundrel of somewhat unusual attainments. The son of an Exeter tradesman in a fair way of business, he had received a good education, and possessed a decided gift of rhetoric and an unusual amount of courage. His record was of the worst.
Digitized by GOOQle
212
THE STORY OF THE SEA
Eleven years before, he had entered the navy as midshipman on board the Culloden, from which ship- he was discharged for gross misconduct. Soon after, however, he obtained a similar appointment on the Leander frigate, and was again dismissed. We next find him passing through several ships in rotation, and
getting dismissed from each as soon as the captain found out his real character —a discovery that seldom took long. At length he became mate of the Resistance, on which vessel he was brought to a court-martial soon after joining, and “ broke ”—i.e., deprived of his commission—and declared incapable of serving again as an officer. . After serving for a short time as common sailor on board the Hebe, he was either invalided or diseharged; for he next turns up in Scotland, where he soon found his way to Edinburgh Gaol for debt. But men were wanted for the navy, and he was sent back from gaol to the fleet again as one of the quota of men required from the Perth district. He received the parochial bounty of £30 allowed to each man. He joined the Sandwich, the flag-ship of Vice-Admiral Buckner, Commander-in-Chicf at the Note. He at once gained great influence amongst his messmates; an influence which soon spread through the fleet. Sedition very naturally spread with it. There are
Digitized by LnOOQle
PARKER AND THE MUTINY AT THE NORE.
213
good grounds for believing the man to have been in the pay of the revolutionists ashore; for, although just discharged from gaol, he bad always plenty of money to stand treat with
In its first stage the mutiny pretty closely resembled that at Spithead. Delegates were appointed, and a statement of grievances handed to Admiral Buckner to forward to the Admiralty. Many of their demands had been already granted; the rest were unreasonable. The Admiralty’s reply, pointing this out, was received on May 22nd. On the 23rd the mutineers struck ViceAdmiral Buckner’s flag, hoisted the red flag in its place, and ordered all the ships at Sheerness to drop down to the Great Noro. The officers were overpowered, and Parker became in efi'ect Lord High Admiral and master of 40,000 men, upon whose loyalty the safety of England had depended. Naturally he committed any number of excesses. Officers were flogged, and on board
“ PARKES AMD THE DELEGATES ATTENDED ” (p. 214).
the flag-ship many were half drowned in the following fashion :—Their hammocks were fastened to their backs, with an 18-poundcr bar-shot as a weight; their hands were tied together, likewise their feet. They were then made fast to a tackle suspended from a yard-arm, and hauled up almost to
Digitized by GOOQle
"14
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
the block ; at the word of command they were dropped suddenly in the sea, where they were allowed to remain a minute. They were again hoisted up, and the process repeated until about every sign of life had fled. The unfortunate victims were then hoisted up by the heels; this was considerately done to get rid of the water from their stomachs. They were then put to bed in their wet hammocks.
The delegates frequently went on shore, and, headed by Parker, marched about in procession to the terror of the inhabitants. They also sent deputations up the river and elsewhere, inviting the crews of other ships to join them. Many did so. On June 6th came the Agamemnon, Leopard, Ardent, and Iris men-of-war, and the Ranger sloop,, base deserters from the squadron under Admiral Duncan, sent to blockade the Texel. In all, eleven new vessels arrived. Parker grew so elated that he talked of taking the whole fleet to sea and selling it to our enemies. He tried to stop the navigation of the Thames by mooring tire ships in a line across the river, and detaining every merchant vessel bound up or down. He swore he would force his way up to London and bombard the city if the Government were not quick in granting his terms. His threats spread such a panic in London that the funds dropped lower than ever known before or since in England's financial history. The forts by the Thames wero heavily armed and garrisoned, and an order was given to take up the buoys that marked the channel of the river. Lord Spencer, Lord Arden, and Admiral Young hurried down to Sheerness and held a board there, at which Parker and the delegates attended and urged such insulting claims that their lordships came back as fast as they went. The Government now began to stir. Bills were hurried through Parliament inflicting the heaviest penalties on all who aided or abetted the mutineers, or even held intercourse with them; and this soon had the effect of damping their ardour. The fleets at Portsmouth and Plymouth disowned all fellowship with them, and the example of one or two ships—such as the Clyde, which from the first had withstood Parker—began to have effect. The ringleader himself now tried to reopen negotiations with the Admiralty, but his demands were too ridiculous to be considered; whereupon he hung Mr. Pitt and Mr. Dundas in effigy at the yard-arm of th© Sandwich. It is a curious fact that on the 4th of June, the King's birthday, the whole fleet insisted on firing a royal salute, displaying the usual colours, and hauling down the red flag during the ceremony. Mr. Parker, however, insisted that it should fly on the flag-ship.
On June 10th the Leopard and Repulse struck the red flag and sailed into the Thames. Other ships quickly followed them, and ran for protection either up the river or under the guns of the fort at Sheerness. By the 13th the red flag had disappeared from every masthead.
By the evening of June 14th the miserable affair was at an end. That day tho crew of the Sandwich carried their ship under the guns at Sheerness, and quietly allowed Mr. Parker to accompany on shore a guard of soldiers which
Digitized by
Google
ADMIRAL DUXCAN MAKES A SPEECH.
215
Vice-Admiral Buckner had sent to arrest him. Sixteen days afterwards he
was hanged, although his wife presented a petition to the Queen in his favour, and is said to have offered a thousand guineas if his life could be spared. Other executions took place, but not many. Some of the mutineers were flogged through the fleet, and others were sent to prison.
We have seen how Admiral Duncan off the Texel was deserted by the
ships on which he relied for victory. At the end of May lie found himself at sea with only his own ship, the Vendable, 74, and the Adamant, 50. But
the Admiral, gallant old salt as he was, refused to be beaten. He called his own ship’s crew together and made them the following speech :—
“ Mv lads,—I once more call yon together with a sorrowful heart, from what I have lately seen of the dissatisfaction of the fleets: I call it dissatisfaction, for the crews have no grievances. To be deserted by my fleet, in the face of an enemy, is a disgrace which, I believe, never before happened to a British admiral, nor could I have supposed H possible. My greatest comfort tinder God is, that I have been supported by the officers, seamen, and marines of this ship; for which, with a heart overflowing with gratitude, I request you to accept my sincere thanks. I flatter myself much by bringing these deluded people to a s only to their King and country, but t<
LORD DUNCAN.
(From ihe Painting by J. Hoppntr, R.A.)
good may result from your example, nse of their duty, which they owe, not themselves.
"The British Navy has ever been the support of that liberty which has been handed down to us by our ancestors, and which I think we shall maintain to the latest posterity: and that can only be done by unanimity' and obedience. This ship’s company, and others who have distinguished themselves by their loyalty and good order, deservo to be, and doubtless will be, the favourites of a grateful country. They will also have, from their inward feelings, a comfort which will be lasting, and not like the bloating and false confidence of those who have swerved from their duty.
“ It has often been my pride with you to look into the Texel, and see a foe which dreaded coming out to meet us; my pride is now humbled indeed I my feelings are not easily expressed! Our cup has overflowed and made us wanton.
Digitized by
Google
216
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
The all-wise Providence has given us this check as a warning, and I hope we shall improve by it. On Him then let us trust where our only security may
LOUD ST. VINCENT.
(From the Picture by Sir IK BcKhy,}
be found. I find there are many good men amongst us; for my own part, I have had full confidence of all in this ship, and once more beg to express my approbation of your conduct
“ May God, who has thus far conducted you, continue so to do; and may the British Navy, the glory and support of our country, be restored to its wonted splendour, and be not only the bulwark of Britain, but the terror of the world.
“ But this can only be effected by a strict adherence to our duty and obedience; and let us pray that the Almighty God may keep us in. the right way of thinking.
'* God bless you all! ”
It is said that at the close of
this address, at once so unassuming and so fervently patriotic, the whole ship’s crew were moved to tears, and one and all announced their intention of standing
by the Admiral in life and death. Duncan, soon after he was deserted at the mouth of the Texel, had heard that the whole Dutch fleet was putting to sea. The dauntless old man refused to run. He sent to Captain Hotham of the Adamant—then his only comrade—an order to anchor alongside of him in the narrowest part of the channel, and fight his vessel till she sank. “ I have taken the depth of the water,” he added, “and when the Pewer-Me goes down, my flag will still fly.”
Conquered and shamed by the courage of this order, the disaffected ships returned one by one to their duty, and Duncan sailed back at once to his station off the Texel, in which harbour lay at anchor the Dutch fleet of fifteen
LORD MACARTNEY.
(From a Painting by Oziai Humphry, ft. A.)
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE MUTINY FLICKERS OUT.
217
fail of the line under Vice-Admiral De Winter. In order to disguise the weakness of his own fleet and keep the Dutch in port until a reinforcement should arrive, Duncan, who had a very pretty simple humour, sent one of his frigates close in and worked her busily in sending all kinds of bogus signals, by means of which De Winter was fully persuaded that the main body of the British fleet lay somewhere in the offing. At any rate, he did not put out; and about the middle of June, Duncan’s reinforcements arrived and the two fleets were again on an equal footing. It was not until October that De Winter ventured forth from the Texel, and gave Duncan the opportunity, not only for an elephantine joke—“Gentlemen, here is a severe Winter approaching; I can only advise you to keep up a good fire ”—but for the victory off Camperdown, the famous stand-up fight in which he took nine battle-ships of Holland and won himself a peerage.
The mutinous spirit displayed at Portsmouth, Plymouth, and the Nore spread even to foreign stations. It broke out on board the Mediterranean fleet then lying off Cadiz, and was only suppressed by the promptitude and firmness of Earl St. Vincent It broke out at the Cape of Good Hope, where the mutineers seized Admiral Pringle’s flag-ship. Lord Macartney, Governor of the Cape, manned his batteries with all the troops available, ordered red-hot shot to be prepared, and then informed the fleet that if the red flag was not at •ace withdrawn and a white one hoisted, he would open fire and blow every ship out of the water. Within a quarter of an hour the red flag was hauled covn. This was the last of the mutiny.
Digitized by LnOOQle
CHAPTER X.
EARLY' METHODS OF NAVAL WARFARE.
Piracy the Germ of Sen-Power—A Noble Sea-rover—Harald the “ Hard in Counsel "—Tn Holengarth, Micklegarth, and Serkland—How he Jumped the Chain—Sea Victories (Old Style)—For Victit!— The Mastery of tho Sea, what it Means, and its Influence on History—Rome against Carthago—Of Crowe, Catapults, Greek Fire, and Dolphins —The Piracies of Sir Andrew Barton— and how Sir Thomas and Sir Edward Howard Suppressed him—“Blockading Brest”—The End of Sir Edward—How English Seamen were Bred—Their Preference for Manoeuvring and for Gunnery—Why the “ Invincible Armada ” was Vanquished—Tromp and “ Line of Battle ”—Tho old “ Fighting Instructions,” and how they Worked—Hawke Disregards them, and Crushes Conflans—The Gamo of “Blockading Brest" Revived—The Swoop of tho Hawk—Quiberon Bay,
FEW nations have ever attained maritime power who did not begin simply as a horde of pirates; friends' of the sea and enemies of all that sailed thereon.
The old Greeks were pirates from the beginning. It was the most natural thing in the world for the son of Ulysses to ask any strange ship’s captain who put in at Ithaca, “Who are your father and your distinguished mother? And I take it for granted that, whoever they are, piracy is your profession.” Nor did the modem descendants of these men give up the pursuit till the Western Powers convinced them that it involved more danger than profit. Our own ancestors, too, whether Saxons or Danes, were unpitying sea-robbers. The Norsemen, of course, were as bad; and, as everybody knows, one of their raids made a short and very important episode in English history. Had not Harald Hardrada (“ the hard in counsel ”), King of Norway, invaded our northern coasts, in September, 1066, we might have been ruled to this day by English kings. Our own Harold, indeed, made short work with the Norseman; but, meanwhile, the Sussex coast had to be left unguarded, and so William of Normandy had the chance to do what no man has done since, to land an army on English soil against the will of the English people.
These two simultaneous invasions contain one or two lessons on the principles of naval warfare, which are not out of date even in these days of big ironclads and torpedoes, and never will be; as we hope to explain in the course of the chapter. Of the two invaders, if either was to escape, one would sooner it had been the gallant sea-rover from Norway. His life, as we have it in the collection of the Norse king's biographies called “ The Circle of the World,” is full of stirring adventures, and presents us with a picture, which, we may consider for a while, of the noble pirate of those days.
Digitized byVvOOQlC
A ROYAL SEA-ROVER.
219
After the fashion of young Norwegians, Harald Sigurdsson began to wander early When his half-brother, St. Olaf, the most famous of Norse kings, fell in battle, he was a lad of fifteen. He escaped, sore wounded, from that fight; and when, through the care of a faithful friend, he was whole again, he fared east—first to Sweden, then to King Jaruleif in Holengarth, or West Russia; and finally, to the goal which most of his countrymen reached sooner or later, the great city of “ Micklegarth,” which we call Constantinople. There he soon made friends of a like spirit; one George is especially named, an officer of high rank in the Imperial army. Harald and George, with a select band of Greeks and Varangians, as the Norsemen in the Emperor’s service were called,
tel out on a tour round all together that summer, and harried,” says the chronicler tersely. Harald was the better man at the game; “when he was in command, he won victories, while George won none.” So Georgo went home, while Harald mith his Varangians went west to Africa, "which the Varangians call Serkland.” Seafaring men in all ages have stood no nonsense
the southern coasts of the Mediterranean; “ they fared
DANISH WAS SHIPS.
about names. If foreigners choose to have awkward names for their countries, it cannot be helped; but we are not going to crack our jaws over them. Serkland it was therefore; and “ in Serkland Harald got possession of eighty castles—some ^ere given up, and some he took by force.” The booty he sent for safe keeping to King Jarizleif When plunder began to run short in Africa, he went over to Sicily. Here he took a town by artifice: he bode his fowlers catch the birds which nested within the town—swallows probably—and fasten to them shavings of light wood, dipped in wax and sulphur; these were lighted, and the unfortunate birds flew straight home to their nests in the thatch. "And though each carried a small load of fire, there was soon a great fire there, and each house burnt to the next till the town was alight” After some years more in Sicily Harald finished this highly successful trip by a pilgrimage to Jerusalem. He bathed in the Jordan, bestowed much wealth on the various shrines, cleared the roads of robbers and other "harrying folk,” having now placed himself on the side of law and order; and so went back to Micklegarth. The news of the accession of Magnus Olafsson, his nephew, to the crown of Norway and
Digitized by LnOOQle
220
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
Denmark made him think of returning home. He had been away ten years or more, and, with friends in power, Norway would be a congenial place of residence. But Zoe, the Queen, though long past her youth, had fallen in love with the young Viking; while Harald for his part was more attracted by the Queen’s niece, Maria; and the end of it was that he found himself in prison. But he was not brother to a saint for nothing. In the very street where the dungeon stood was a chapel dedicated to St Olaf; the dungeon itself communicated with a tower open at the top; and to this tower came the next night a rich lady, to whom the saint had appeared in a vision, bidding her deliver his brother; her servants mounted the tower with a ladder and let down a rope —and Harold was a free man again. That same night he carried oft* Maria, and with his men went on board two galleys belonging to the Varangians, who, no doubt, let him take them willingly enough. “ Then,” says the chronicler, “ they rowed into the Sound; but when they came to a place where an iron chain lay across the Sound, Harald ordered that the men should put themselves at the oars in each galley, but those men who were not rowing should all run aft in the galley, and each take his hammock in his arms; so they ran the galleys up on the iron chain. As soon as they were fast and had no more way on, then he bade all men run forward; then the galley in which Harold was swung up and bounded off the chain with the shock, but the other rode on the iron, and split, and many were lost then; but some were taken out of the Sound. With this Harald comes out of Micklegarth He went into the Black Sea; but before he sailed away from land, he set the maiden ashore and gave her a good escort back to Micklegarth. Ho bade her let Zoe, her kinswoman, know how much power she had over Harald, and whether the Queen's authority had done aught to hinder him from taking the maiden.'* Then Harald sailed north, and, going probably up the Danube, came to Austria, and passed on to Western Russia, where he married the daughter of his old friend. King Jarizleif.
Such was the life of a royal sea-rover in the eleventh century. The chroniclers, who tell us tersely that Harald “ harried ” or “ won victories,” omit to say what became of the prisoners. Sad truth to tell, they were disposed of in the easiest and most economical manner. This sounds horrible enough to us; to our forefathers of a few hundred years ago, it was the rule of sea warfare that the.vanquished went overboard; and the exceptions to this rule were only on special agreement. As late as 1607, when the Dutch admiral, Heems-kerk, destroyed the Spanish fleet under Alvarez in Gibraltar Bay, the Spaniards shared the fate of the fleet. Upwards of 4,000 of them are said to have perished, while the loss of the Dutch, in killed, seems to have been about one hundred. This might perhaps be thought an exceptional instance of bloodthirsty ferocity, due to the exceptional bitterness of the quarrel between the Dutch and the Spaniards, aggravated on this occasion by the death of Heems-kerk ; but we may remember that in 1588, when the Invincible Armada came
Digitized by
Google
HOW THE CONQUERED WERE DISPOSED OF.
221
into the Channel, and the flagship of Don Pedro de Valdes, being disabled by a collision with another Spanish ship, was taken by Drake, she yielded only on the condition that their lives should be spared; and no better terms could be obtained. The condition was carried out to the letter; but when the ship was sent into Dartmouth most of her men died of starvation, or of disease brought on by starvation. There was no condition that they were to be fed ; their own provisions had gone bad ; “ their fish," it was reported, “ savours so
“ RAS THE OALLBTB VP OX THE IRON CHAIN ” (p. 220).
that it is not to be eaten, and their bread is full of worms.” Private charity would do nothing for men who had come “ on so wicked an intent,” and the poor wretches were left to die. “ We would have been very glad,” wrote Sir George Cary, the Lord-Lieu tenant of Devonshire, "they had been made waterspaniels when they were first taken.” Similarly, after the great battle off Gravelines, those Spanish ships which ivere cast on the Dutch coast had very cold entertainment; and one, in a sinking state, was hailed by Captain Crosse, of the Hope, to surrender. She demanded conditions, and whilst the negotiations were pending, she gave a heavy lurch and went down; every man on
Digitized byGoogle
222
THE STOEY OF THE SEA.
board was lost, without—as it would appear—any attempt to save them. Even the name of the ship was not known.
Now, of course, this is all changed; and if an enemy’s ship goes down in battle, even if she has not surrendered, the victor spares no exertion to save the drowning crew; as was done at Gibraltar, in 1782, when the Spanish floating batteries were burnt; as at the Nile, when the French flagship Orient blew up and the little hero of Mrs. Hemans’s little poem perished, though whether exactly in the manner described by Mrs, Hernans may be doubted; as, again, at Trafalgar, when the French Achille was wrapped in flames; or as at Lissa, in 1866, when the Italian ironclad was fatally rammed by the Austrian. Everyone knows that the distinctive test of true courage is that
“ Tis a furious lion in battle, so let it;
But, duty appeased, ’tis in mercy a lamb;”
but this was not always admitted; the lamb-like clemency is quite a modern idea.
The credit of the milder mode of carrying on war is naturally assigned to the milder methods of civilisation or of a more practical Christianity ; but perhaps the change in the manner of fighting has had at least as much to do with it. When the fighting was hand-to-hand, when a ship was fought for and won inch by inch, it might well seem to the infuriated conqueror only useless trouble to make prisoners. With tho invention of gunpowder and the gradual development of the gun, this hand-to-hand fighting came to an end, A beaten ship surrendered simply by striking—that is, hauling down her flag; and as that was sometimes considered insufficient, she might show also a white flag, or even the flag of her conqueror. The submission once made, her men were prisoners, and if they were to be slaughtered, they must be slaughtered in cold blood, which was a very different thing.
It has often been pointed out that the loss in battles has been very much less since the introduction of gunpowder. At sea, at any rate, the improvement has acted in this way. In the actual fighting, the losses are probably heavier than ever; it is after the fighting that the saving of life comes in. Trafalgar—as being nearer to our own age—will be counted a bigger battle than Sluys (24th June, 1340), though tho interests at stake were very much the same, and the number of men engaged was smaller; but at Trafalgar the loss of the enemy in killed was probably not more than twenty per cent., if so much; at Sluys, with the exception of a few ships that made good their escape, it would seem to have been total According to the celebrated letter of Edward III., the number of men-at-arms and other armed people in the enemy’s fleet amounted to 35,000; of which it was estimated that 5,000 had. escaped, “ the remainder-—as we are given to understand—are lying dead in many places on the coast of Flanders.” About the number and the proportion of the killed there may have been some exaggeration; but it is certain that
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE MASTERY OF THE SEA.
223
the loss was very great: so great that no one would venture to break the terrible news to the French King. It was, however, necessary that he should be told, so the Court fool was deputed to tell him. “ What cowards those English are!” he said; “abominable cowards!" And this repeated several times, with different expletives, in the King’s presence, at last drew forth the desired question. “ Why do you say that ? ” " Oh,” answered the fool, “because they didn’t dare to jump into the sea, as our brave Frenchmen did." This led Philip to further inquiries, and so to a knowledge of what had happened. But, beyond the tremendous slaughter which had taken place, it may be doubted whether anyone then clearly realised the full importance of the victory—or defeat; whether anyone understood that it was the decisive battle of the war, the keynote of the opera which was played in France for the next twenty years. Even now, our histories seem to attach much greater importance to Crecy or Poitiers, not considering that, but for the victory at Sluys, the war would have been waged on English soil, not on French; English homesteads would have been burnt or ravaged, not French; and the French army would have been composed of trained soldiers, while the raw militia or half-armed peasants would have been in the ranks of the English.
Thus we have seen, by two examples in the early history of England, the immense value of holding a mastery on the sea. For lack of it England was conquered by William the Norman; by possession of it she could insist that the long quarrel of the fourteenth century should be fought out on French soil and not on her own. Such has always been the reward of mastery at sea—or, as it is technically termed, the command of the sea. It marks what an able American writer—Captain Mahan, of the United States Navy — has aptly called “ The Influence of Sea-Power upon History.” The strength of this command belongs to no age or country; it is a principle inseparable from naval warfare, independent of the class of ships or their armaments. The vessels may be canoes or row-boats, snakes or galleys, frigates, ships of the line, or ironclads of 15,000 tons weight; they may be armed with cross-bows or slings, 32-pounders or 100-ton guns, the effect is the same, and amounts to this—that if two countries at war are separated by the sea, the course of the war is guided by the determination of that one which has the command of the sea. It has the power to light or not to right; to choose the theatre of operations and to change it at discretion. It can harass the enemy by ravaging his coasts; it can destroy his commerce, and reduce him by blockade and financial ruin; or even by want and starvation, unless his internal resources are sufficient for his needs. To these results there is absolutely no exception; they can be traced from the earliest ages to the latest. It is, therefore, no less important than it is interesting to consider the methods by which this command of the sea, this weapon all-powerful in war, has been gained.
It has been gained only by righting or by readiness to right Trickcry or evasion may sometimes have given a momentary superiority; if so, it has
Digitized by GOOQle
224	THE STORY OF THE SEA.
been short-lived, and has disappeared as soon as the trick has been discovered, the evasion been known. But of two opposing nations, that one which can place and maintain a superior force in any sea has actually the command of that sea, and will hold it without dispute as long as it can maintain an obvious superiority. When it ceases to do that, the command will be disputed and will have to be won back by actual fighting. It is thus that, though much—very much—is achieved in naval war without any fighting at all, every success or incident of power is based on fighting, and depends on a readiness, a willingness, an eagerness to fight—a determination to crush the enemy whenever and wherever he. can be got at. To illustrate this, it is not necessary to look further back than to the war with Russia forty years ago. Both in the Baltic and Black Sea the Russians had a considerable force both of ships of the line and frigates; and there were several who supposed that when our fleets entered these seas there might be some sharp fighting. The Russians took a different view of the situation; their' ships retired under the shelter of their forts, and without opposition relinquished tho command of the sea to the allies; and at no recorded time has such perfect command of the sea ever been held. The result thus obtained was exceptional both in its completeness and its manner. In former times the command of the sea has been stoutly contested, and won only after very hard fighting. It is for this that most naval actions have taken place. Once the point at issue decided, the war has sought other methods, which will be described later on.
It is going back a long way to speak of the wars between the Romans and the Carthaginians; but they give perfect illustrations of the principle laid down. It is familiarly known that when war between these people first broke out the Carthaginians were, by repute and in appearance, the first maritime power of the Mediterranean; they had ships in plenty, with skilled officers and skilled seamen. The Romans had neither ships nor seamen, and their officers, though splendid soldiers, knew nothing about manoeuvring a ship. The Athenians had long before shown that the essence of sea-fighting was to make the ship the principal weapon of offence, and that in the perfection of manoeuvring lay the road to victory; but to this the Romans were quite unequal, and they, therefore, devoted their ingenuity to devising means of utilising their extreme merit as soldiers. If the enemy’s ships could	be
grappled with and the battle fought out hand-to-hand, their victory was assured. It was to this end that they invented a machine which, from a projecting iron spike at its extremity, something resembling a bird's bill, was called a corvus, or crow, but which in reality was a heavy, substantial gangboard. Tlie heel of this was fastened by a hinge to the bottom of a post, or derrick, stepped on the deck of the ship near the bow; and a tackle leading from the other end to the top of the derrick permitted it to be triced, up into an almost vertical position. The whole, derrick and all, could be turned round in any required direction, in a manner closely resembling the way in.
Digitized by LnOOQle
. . COULD NOT PREVENT THE ROMANS CLOSING” (p. 226).
15
Digitized by LnOOQle
226
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
which gangboards for the steamers are fitted on the landing-stage at Liverpool; and thus, when an enemy’s ship came within reach, the gangboard could be let down by the run, with a crash, on to the enemy’s deck. The crow’s-bill at the end dug into the deck and there fixed itself, and the men-at-arms could pass freely over. Of course, if the Carthaginians had really had the manoeuvring skill with which they have been credited, the Romans could never have found an opportunity to use the corvus; but they were merchant seamen, not men-of-war’s men, and had no experience of tactical manoeuvres; they could not prevent the Romans closing, they could not avoid the stroke of the eorvua or the entry of the Roman soldiers. It was in a battle fought in 260 b.c., in what is now the Bay of Milazzo, that the Romans, under their consul, Duilius, first introduced this weapon and obtained a very complete- victory, capturing 80 out of 130 of the enemy’s galleys; the rest fled.
This celebrated battle was very far from finishing the war, but it marked the lines upon which it was to go on. The Carthaginians had some successes; the Romans had some appalling losses—losses from storm and from unwary seamanship—but in the long run, after a war of twenty-three years, the Carthaginian sea power was crushed—crushed so utterly that in the Second Punic War, which began twenty-three years after the end of the first, they made no attempt to dispute the command of the sea; as the necessary consequence of which, when Hannibal wished to lead his army from Spain into Italy, he was compelled to make that long, painful, and disastrous march through Gaul and over the Alps. No substantial reinforcements could bo sent to him; and when at last his brother Hasdrubal attempted a inarch similar to his own ho was defeated and slain at the Metaurus. What Hannibal's genius accomplished we all know; what it might have accomplished had it been backed up by the command of the sea we can picture to ourselves. In his delightful “Fifteen Decisive Battles of the World,” Sir Edward Creasy describes the battle on the Mctaurus as the turning-point of the war, deciding the fate of Carthage and the destiny of Europe. With truer insight into the causes of events, the Italians seem to recognise the battle in the Bay of Milazzo as marking the issue; and amongst the first of those large ships which testified to their determination to have a powerful navy, was the magnificent ironclad which they christened Duilio.
In their later wars the Romans added to the crows catapults for throwing stones; but these were very heavy—so indeed were the crows—and to bear the weight the galleys had to be built both stouter and with fuller bows, and were therefore clumsy and slow in comparison with the relatively lighter ships of the Macedonians and Rhodians. These trusted mainly to the rain as of old; but the growing size of the galleys introduced a new and curious danger. The great weight of these vessels, propelled at their utmost speed, drove them with such force against the enemy’s ships that they were apt to
Digitized byLnOOQle
CROWS, CATAPULTS, AND GREEK FIRE.
227
stick in the hole which they made, and so to be held fast till they were themselves rammed and sunk. Two such coses are clearly reported, and the conditions of the accident show that there must have been many others. In the present day this danger appears in a new guise; and with the enormous weight and great speed of modern ironclads, the ram-bow of the one deeply penetrating the other’s side is apt to be wrenched and torn, so as to place the ship in very great danger.
It was, however, by the Rhodians that a new weapon was introduced into naval war 190 years before the Christian era. The attending circumstances were also curious. It was during the Roman war against Antiochus, and the Rhodian squadron, in the Roman interest, was lying in a close harbour ui Samos, keeping watch on the Syrians at Ephesus. But their watch was insufficient, and early one morning the Syrian fleet appeared off the harbour, while at the same time a strong body of troops, which had been landed on the other side of the island, brought their catapults to play on the harbour and fairly drove the Rhodians out. But the passage was narrow, they could only go out one at a time, and so, one by one, they fell in among the Syrian ships waiting for them outside and were destroyed in detail A few only escaped; these had fitted long spars projecting over the bows, probably sloping upwards like a modern bowsprit, and on the end of these spars were iron pots hill of blazing fire. The terror of the flames cleared a way for the few ships that carried them. From the fact that only a few ships were armed in this way, it would seem that the experiment was being tried by some of the most daring and versatile commanders. It never got much beyond the experimental stage, even among the Rhodians, for they probably found that there was at least a fair chanco of its burning the wrong ship. As to the combustible used we have no information; but as they had, or may have had, resin, pitch, sulphur, and bitumen, including probably crude petroleum, they can have had no difficulty in composing a mass sufficiently inflammable. Many hundred years later some similar composition was used by the Greeks of Constantinople, under the name of Greek fire, as to the composition of which. there has been a good deal of speculation. It was a liquid exceedingly inflammable, and, when lighted, not easily extinguished. All this points to crude petroleum, of which they could get as much as they liked from Baku or elsewhere. We are nowadays too apt to think that the men of old time were very ignorant, and could not possibly' know of many things familiar to us because they did not blazon the knowledge abroad. Their custom in this respect was very different from ours. When they had a good thing, they kept it to themselves; and the difficulty of communication rendered secrecy easy. It was, they thought, enough for their enemies to know that “ Greek fire ” was a thing to be feared. It was discharged, either in a keg or jar, by means of a catapult; or in a smaller jar by a sling or even by hand; or simply through a hose by a force-pump. In theory it was very terrible; but in practice it was so
Digitized by LnOOQle
228
THE STOEY OF THE SEA,
ANCIENT RHODES.
(F?ow an dnctaU MS.)
dangerous even to its friends that it never became common. It was a thing probably more talked about than used.
That nothing is new has grown into a proverb; it seems equally true that nothing becomes old. At any rate, with regard to Greek fire, more than one suggestion has been put forward within the last few years, and patents have been taken out for methods of throwing crude petroleum or some similar abomination into an enemy’s town, or on to the deck of an enemy’s ship. One is by means of a pump worked by steam power, to project the liquid through the nozzle of a sort of squirt Another is to lob
a large tin shell fi 11 e d with t h o
liquid from a large but light mortar; the range, of course, would be small, but the damage done, if the shell took effect, would be great The proposal, however, has not received much favour, probably for the same reason that prevented the general adoption of the Rhodian fire two thousand years ago or the permanent use of the Greek fire some twelve hundred years later— the very great danger, that is, of its not being able to distinguish friends from foes and of burning the wrong ships.
A weapon which was used by the Greeks and Romans, but afterwards fell into disfavour, was the dolphin. This was a ponderous mass of iron or »t iron and lead combined, which could be hoisted to the yard-arm and let go suddenly, so as to fall on the deck of an enemy’s ship. The idea of the German critic (Graser; “ De Re Navali," § 82) that it weighed several tons is, of course, Absurd, but it may have weighed several hundredweight; it was certainly heavy enough to smash what it fell on, and then, half-suspended at the end of a rope, to dance and gambol in a manner likely to do a great deal of mischief. It was, however, cumbersome; difficult, probably, to set to work; and the conditions under which it could work to advantage were rare ;
Digitized by
Google
SIR ANDREW BARTON.
229
for clearly it could not be allowed free play when men-at-arms were pouring over the curvus into the enemy’s ship. It thus fell into disuse, and was not reviver!. If ever used in the Mediterranean galleys during the Middle Ages, it was not common, and in Western war it was altogether unknown. This fact has, incidentally, a curious literary interest In the celebrated ballad of “Sir Andrew Barton,” the interest of the story turns on the repeated attempts that were made on board the Scots ship to let some such machine as a dolphin loose on board the Englishman. This machine is described as something very terrible, and the “ merchant,” addressing “ Lord Howard,” says:—
“ Were ye twenty ships and he but one, I sweare by kirk and bower and hall, He would overcome them every one, If once his beams they do down fall.”
“ the tuhuh or the flames " (p- 227).
Bishop Percy thought that this was evidence that such weapons were still tn use in the time of Henry VIII. It is more probably’ only one more proof that the ballad, notwithstanding its poetic charm, is historically inaccurate. The story of this famous encounter, as told by Lord Herbert of Cherbury, is briefly as follows:—
Digitized byVtOOQIC
230
THE STOHY OF THE SEA.
In the year 1476 a Portuguese squadron had seized a Scottish ship laden with a rich cargo, and commanded by one John Barton. Barton promptly obtained letters of marque from the Scottish Government to make reprisal on the subjects of Portugal He does not seem to have used them to any great advantage, for they were renewed to his sons thirty years afterwards. The sons, however, set to work in earnest. Not content with repaying themselves for their loss, they became confirmed pirates. The Council Board of England was daily pestered with complaints from mariners and merchants that the Bartons, under pretence of searching for Portuguese goods, were interrupting English navigation and looting English ships whenever they felt strong enough. King Henry VIIL, who had reasons of his own for standing well with Scotland at that time, made little of those complaints. The Earl of Surrey, however (who was then Treasurer and Marshal of England), at length lost his temper nt the Council Board, and declared that while ho had an estate that could furnish out a ship, or a son that was capable of commanding one, the narrow seas should not be infested. Henry could not well refuse this offer. Two ships were at once fitted out and put to sea under the Earl’s two sons, Sir Thomas and Sir Edward Howard. Foul weather separated them; the same befel the two pirate ships—the Lian, commanded by Sir Andrew Barton in person, one of the ablest sea officers of his time, and the Union, or Jenny Perwin, or Bark of Scotland, as she is variously named. The strength of the former vessel is thus described in the ballad:—
“ He is brass within and steel without, With beams on his top-castle strong;
And eighteen pieces of ordnance
He carries on each side along;
And he has a pinnace dearly dight, St. Andrew’s Cross it is his guide, His pinnace beareth nine score men, And fifteen cannons on each side.”
Sir Thomas Howard, as ho lay in the Downs, descried this vessel making for Scotland, and gave chase and overtook her, “ and there was a soro battuile.” The Englishmen were “ fierce,” and the Scots defended themselves manfully, and “ ever Sir Andrew' blew his whistle to encourage his men. Yet for all that, Lord Howard and his men by clean force entered the main deck. There the English entered on all sides, and the Scots fought sore on the hatches: but in conclusion Andrew was taken, being so sore wounded that he died there, and the remnants of the Scots were taken with their ship.” Says the ballad :—
“Lord Howard took a sword in hand, And off be smote Sir Andrew’s head ;
‘I must have left England many a day, If tlum wert alive as thou art dead.'
Digitized by GOOQle
SIR EDWARD HOWARD.
231
He caused his body to be cast
Over the hatchboard into the sea;
And about his middle three hundred crowns: ‘ Wherever thou land this will bury thee.’ ”
AH this while Sir Edward Howard was in chase of the other piratical ship, and, though the Scots defended themselves like “hardy and well-stomached men" succeeded in boarding her. The prizes were taken to Blackwall on the 2nd of August, 1511, and the prisoners, who were only 150 in number—“so Woody had the action been”—tried before the Bishop of Winchester and
the Council; “ and yet between England and Scotland, that they, contrary thereunto as thieves and pirates, had robbed the Kiner's subjects within Ids streams, 'Therefore they W deserved to die by the law, and to be hanged at the low-water Mark. Then, said the Scots, 1 We acknowledge our offence, and ask
there the Bishop rehearsed to them, whereas peace is as
ENGLISH WAR-VESSELS OF THE FIFTEENTH CENTCKV.
mercy —not the
law.' Then, said a priest who was among them, ‘ We appeal from the King’s justice to his mercy.’ Then the Bishop asked him if he were authorised by them to say so, and they cried all, ‘Yea, yea* ‘Then,’ said he, ‘you shall dnd the King’s mercy above his justice ; for where ye were dead by the law, yet by his mercy he will revive you ; wherefore ye shall depart out of this realm within twenty days, upon pain of death if ye be found here after the twenty days; and pray for the King.’ And so they passed into their country.’’
King James IV. was “wonderful wroth" at the death of Barton, and required restitution from Henry, who replied very sensibly that it became not one prince to charge another with breach of the peace for doing justice upon a pirate and thief; but the affair rankled with the Scots and helped to hasten the war which ended in James's defeat and death on Flodden Field. This exploit seems to have laid tho foundation of Sir Edward Howard’s fortune; for on the 7th of April, 1512, we find him appointed the King’s Admiral-
Digitized byVtOOQIC
232
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
in-Chief, and in August of the same year commanding the English fleet off Brest.
Brest has since been a very familiar name in English naval annals; but it had then only lately become a French port, and its naval importance had not yet been fully recognised. Howard was then inaugurating the system of “ blockading Brest,” which later ages were left to develop; and when the
"THE SCOTS FOCOHT SOKE " (P. 230).
French fleet attempted to put to sea “ then the Lord-Admiral was very joyous: then every man prepared according to his duty, the archers to shoot, the gunners to lose, the men-of-arms to fight, the pages went to the top castle with darts.” And so they fell to and " shot ordnance so terribly together that al) the sea coast sounded of it.”
The battle was fought in the very entrance of the harbour. The French were commanded by the Sieur de Portzmoguer, a well-known Breton name, though unfamiliar to the French chroniclers, who turned it into Primauguet, and equally unfamiliar to the English, to whom it became Sir Piers Morgan. Portzmoguer in person was on board the Marie la Cordeliire, a large ship with a crew of a thousand men. Among the English ships were the Sovereign
Digitized byLnOOQle
HE BEGINS THE PRACTICE OF “BLOCKADING BREST.”
233
and the Regent, each of which had crews of about seven hundred. It was these two, the strongest in the English fleet, that attacked the Cordeliere, which, in getting out of the way of the Sovereign, fell on board the Regent, commanded by Sir Thomas Knyvet, Howard's brother-in-law. The two ships grappled each other, and while the fight was still raging, one of the French, “a varlet gunner, being desperate, put fire to the gunpowder and set the
whole ship on fire, the flames whereof set fire in the Regent; and so these two noble ships, which were so grappled together that they could not part, were consumed by fire.” Of the seventeen hundred men engaged very’ few were saved. The disaster and the terrible death of their admiral struck a panic into the French, who fled confusedly into Brest. The English anchored outside, and afterwards ravaged the coasts of Brittany and Normandy, taking and burning many French ships.
The next year Howard returned off Brest, determined to wreak a still more
SIR WALTER RALEIGH.
(Fr<>ni lh^ Portrait by Zucchero.}
bloody revenge for the
death of his brother-in-law.
The French had, however,
taken such precautions as prevented him from getting into Brest; and, whilst blockading the port, Howard learnt that a fleet of galleys had anchored close in shore, some little distance off, waiting for an opportunity to slip into the harbour. He determined to attack them, and, as the ships could not get in, he resolved to go in in boats. It is the first “cutting-out” expedition recorded. Howard himself took the command; and the boat he was in, leading, rowed, through a storm of shot, straight for the admiral’s galley, and grappled with her. Howard, followed by seventeen men, sprang on board; but before the others could join him, the grappling rope was cut, the boat drifted away, and Howard and his few companions were thrust overboard at the point of pike. The other boats, unable to get in through the deadly fire that opened on them, and seeing Howard apparently beaten off, retired, quite ignorant of
Digitized by
Google
234
THE STOIiY OF THE SEA.
what had happened. At that time the badge and mark of the admiral’s rank was a gold chain and whistle. These Howard took off and hurled into the sea, to prevent the possibility of their falling into the enemy's hands; but it does not appear that even his body was recovered. His death and burial were in one; or, as was said afterwards of Sir John Hawkyns:—
“The waves became his winding-sheet; the waters were Ids tomb;
But for his fame, the ocean sea was not sufficient room." *
Sir Edward Howard was by no means the first of the naval heroes of England, and the notion, so often put forward, that England had no navy till the Tudors took the matter in hand is utterly absurd. Such battles as that off Sandwich in 1217, as that of Sluys in 1340, or that of Harflcur in 1416— to say nothing of less important actions—were not fought without a navy, even if we admit that our early forefathers under Hengist or Horsa, Ella or Cedric, swam over to this country.
There is, however, a small fraction of truth in the statement that the navy was born under the Tudors. During the weak reign of Henry VI. and the dire civil war which ended it, the navy was very much neglected, and almost ceased to exist. Edward IV. had not troubled himself to reconstruct it; and Richard III., if he had the wish or the knowledge, had not the leisure. He might otherwise have been in a position to prevent the landing, or even the sailing from Harflcur, of Henry of Richmond and his 2,000 adherents—a fact which, thus brought forcibly to Henry’s consideration, may very well be supposed to have had a good deal to do with the attention which he and his son after him paid to the re-establishment and reorganisation of the navy. The time, too, was favourable: new arms, new methods, were being introduced; progress was rapid, even sudden; and, notwithstanding their clumsy, uncouth forms, their lack of symmetry, their imperfection in detail, the ships which fought off Brest under Howard essentially resembled those which three centuries later fought off Cape Trafalgar under Nelson.
But, of course, much was done during the years which followed the death of Sir Edward Howard. The practice of long voyages or lengthened cruises necessarily led to the improvement of the ships; they had to be made not only seaworthy but sea-keeping; not only fit to make a passage but to stand the continual buffet of winds and waves. How these improvements came about—improvements in form, in construction, in ballasting, in fitting, in ttggitig—we know not. Topsy-like, they “growed" Some have been attributed to Hawkyns, some to Raleigh. It is more probable that they were the accumulated experiences of hundreds of seamen, who spent weeks and months on end cruising in the chops of the Channel, or stretching from the coast of Spain to the Azores, or even to the West Indies. About this early navigation we know next to nothing. We are told that old William Hawkyns traded
• “ Dictionary of National Biography?’
Digitized byVrOOQlC
WHY THE GREAT ARMADA WAS NOT "INVINCIBLE.”
235
with Brazil as early as 1528, and that John Hawkyns made three voyages to the West Indies before 1569. We are not to suppose that these were the only Englishmen that sailed those seas, and traded or plundered as opportunity offered. But the achievements of pirates are not usually chronicled, and still less so if—as we may suppose—they did not trouble about seeing those they robbed safe to land. In the infancy of ocean navigation it was no uncommon thing for a ship to go down with all hands, as, for instance, in 1591, when the Penelope went down off Cape Corrientes. It was nothing out of the way for a ship leaving port never to be heard of again; and it was quite impossible to say whether she had sunk from the fury of the waves or of the pirates. Of all this we know nothing. What we do know is that there grew up a race of English seamen numerous enough, skilful enough, bold enough to fight, to defeat, to destroy the great Armada of Spain at the height of her power. It was not a mere chance that the English ships were better manned, better found, better equipped, better armed than those of the Spaniards; the skill with the great gun which the English showed was not intuitive; and, so far as teaching goes, the Spaniards professed to look with scorn on the weapon as one unworthy of a gentleman or a soldier.
Only seventeen years before the date of the Invincible Armada they had assisted in winning the battle of Lepanto against the Turks; and though the Spanish contingent in the victorious fleet consisted mainly of Neapolitans or Genoese, there were many, both officers and men, who fought off Cape Skropha in 1571 and off Plymouth, St. Catherine’s, or Gravelines in 1588. Many of them, too, had betwcen-whiles fought at Terceira in 1582, against Strozzi and the semi-piratical fleet which was supposed to be upholding the cause of Dom Antonio, the pretender to the crown of Portugal. Santa Cruz, too, who commanded the rearguard at Lepanto, and in chief at Terceira, was appointed to command the expedition against England. Fortunate in his death as in his life, he died while the fleet was fitting out, and thus escaped the spectacle of its defeat and ruin. He was a brave man and an able commander, but his whole experience anti the traditions of Mediterranean war had taught him that success depended on bringing the battle to a hand-to-hand issue. But this tho English had learned to avoid. Those of them who were with Strozzi at Terceira had already recognised that this close fighting reduced the battle to a numerical calculation; that the advantage would rest with the larger numbers, giving no part to the seamanship, on which they prided themselves, or to the gunnery, in which they excelled; and, as Strozzi’s only idea of a battle at sea agreed with that of Santa Cruz, they took an early opportunity of providing for their own safety. Their conduct was, perhaps, not “magnificent,’’ but it was “war.” Santa Cruz, however, described it as cowardice, and his ideas seem to have prevailed. Notwithstanding the personal experience of many, the general opinion of the Spaniards, in the spring of 1588, seems to have been that the English, though impudent smugglers
Digitized by
Google
236
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
and unscrupulous pirates, were not likely to offer any formidable resistance to an organised fleet of Spanish ships of war.
The series of battles in the Channel and North Sea during the last ten days of July, 1588, which resulted in the complete defeat of the Armada, thus marks the change from the old order to the new. The Spanish ships —clumsy, old-fashioned, with lofty castles and bulwarks—sagged to leeward like a haystack on a barge; they had few seamen, but were crowded with soldiers; they had plenty of swords, pikes, and muskets, but their armament of great guns was paltry, and—such as it was—they were utterly unskilled in the use of it. On the other hand, the English ships, looking smaller because neater and more compact, were built and equipped according to the best suggestions of practical experience, were manned by sailors who worked their ships or their cannon with a quickness and certainty l>orn of familiarity, and were commanded by officers who were equally at home in storms of the Atlantic or amid the shoals of the Channel—men who had sailed round the world with Drake, or had searched the Arctic seas with Frobiscr and Davis. We know now that between such Spanish and such English ships there was no effective comparison: but till the end of July, 1588, the Spaniards did not know it, and many Englishmen were not sure of it. But the lesson of the campaign,
MARTIN KKOmHllK.	• n »
and especially the lesson of July 29th, was impressed on the minds of each. It was a revolution in the art of naval war which the English were quick to understand and to profit by.
But revolution though it was, it was in reality going back to the ancient
practice of the Athenians, who also had learnt that sea-fighting was more
efficient and more certain when the element of sea-soldiering was kept in strict
subordination. But in modem, as in ancient times, this system called emphatically for seamen. The Athenian prestige waned when the flower of the Athenian seamen were destroyed at Syracuse; and, with the exception perhaps of the Rhodians, whose fame was swallowed up in that of their too powerful ally, no other people but the English and the Dutch have clearly understood and practised the Athenian system. This is perhaps at variance with popular sentiment, which loves to picture our naval victories won by the clash of cutlasses. It is quite a mistake. The principle by which the English navy won and has maintained its prestige is to avoid boarding—that is to say, hand-to-hand fighting—as much as possible. Its victories have been achieved by
Digitized by GOOQle
HOW IT WAS VANQUISHED.
237
superior seamanship and superior gunnery. The superior seamanship prevented the enemy from boarding and placed the ship in the most advantageous position; the superior gunnery crushed the enemy’s defences, killed his men, and pounded his ship into a wreck. The French, on the other hand, with less aptitude as sailors, crowded their ships with men and endeavoured to bring the battle to a hand-to-hand issue. When they could do this they had
the advantage. When, as was more commonly the case, they could not do it, their number of men swelled their loss, and directly contributed to their defeat
In the battles against the Invincible Annada there was no profession on the part of the English of aiming at any technical system; but, as a matter of common sense, they adopted one admirably suited to the circumstances, and as sound in theory as in practice. This was the cutting off single ships as opportunity offered, and pounding them with a very superior force —two or three, or even more, devoting themselves to one, till
"HOWARD . .	. ar KAN a OX BOARD ” (p. 233).
l
r
4
f J r
that one, in a beaten and sinking condition, fled from the contest to run herself ashore or to founder in the open sea.
We now come to a very important chapter in naval strategy. Fifty or sixty years after the defeat of the Spanish Armada the Dutch admiral, Martin Tromp, a sailor from his infancy, conceived that by ranging his ships one astern of the other, in what—on shore—would be called 11 Indian file,” each ship would be better able to give or receive support, and she would be able to fire, even in the smoke of a battle, without danger of firing into her
h
J
i
Digitized by GOOQle
238
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
own friends. In the second Dutch war this formation was officially prescribed for the English fleet, and in the third it was commonly adopted. It was then seen that in this fighting line the smaller ships were out of place, and were, indeed, a source of danger to the whole, by their making a weak part in the line through which the enemy might pass. Even in the third Dutch war the line was composed only of efficient fighting ships, the smaller ones doing duty as scouts; and later on it became the custom to count the strength of a fleet not by the gross number of the ships, but by the number of ships “ fit
to lie in a line ”—a term which quickly settled down, about the date of the battle of La Hogue, into the long-familiar “ ships of the line of battle.” The line of battle ahead was then prescribed as the one fighting formation; and Russell, in 1693, and Rooke, in 1702, specifically ordered that the fleet so ranged in line ahead, and being to win<lward of the enemy, was to bring the van on a level with the enemy's van, and then engage all along the line; and these orders, receiving the sanction of the Admiralty, were issued to the fleet as “ Fighting Instructions,” from which no deviation was permitted. If the enemy, being to leeward, was equally ready to fight, there was no further difficulty, and the two lines could pound each other to a standstill without any great advantage to either, as was done in the celebrated battle of Malaga in 1704. But if it suited the enemy's purpose to avoid action, and if he had sea-room, it
was impossible in practice to compel him to fight, or, having begun the fight, to compel him to continue it. In a battle off Toulon in 1744 —a battle which the angry trials afterwards rendered notorious—Admiral Mathews made an unsuccessful attempt to compel the enemy to fight All he succeeded in doing was throwing his own line into confusion, for which he was tried by court-martial and cashiered, as having acted contrary to the “ Instructions.” In a still more notorious action off Minorca in 1756, Admiral Byng, unwilling to risk being cashiered as Mathews had been, and being unable to devise any method, in accordance with the “ Instructions,” for compelling the enemy to continue the action, took refuge in a “ masterly inactivity ” for which he was tried by court-martial and sentenced to be shot And again, in an action oft’ the mouth of the Chesapeake in 1781, Admiral Graves, in trying to engage all along the line, van to van, according to the “ Instructions,”
Digitized by^OOQlC
“LINE OF BATTLE AHEAD.”
239
succeeded in getting part of his own fleet severely mauled and was compelled to return to New York, leaving the French fleet, under the Count de Grasse, to enforce the blockade of Yorktown, consequent on which came the surrender of Lord Cornwallis and the acknowledgment of the independence of the North American Colonies.
These four battles, extending over a period of nearly eighty years, ought, we may think, to have taught the Admiralty the absurdity of compelling officers to fight in one particular manner which the enemy perfectly well understood. In no one instance was any advantage gained by following those “Instructions.” The English fleet did win battles during the century, but it was by throwing the “ Instructions ” to the winds; by the admiral in command risking his commission and his life. Notably was this the cose in 1759, when Sir Edward Hawke drove the French fleet, under Marshal de Conflans, into Quiberon Bay, took or destroyed six of their finest ships, while the bulk of the rest fled up the Vilaine, “ a river in whose waters ship of the line had never before floated,” where they remained for a couple of years, when, in darkness or fog, they managed to escape. The blow to the French was so tremendous, the loss to the English was so small, that in both countries it became the fashion to attribute the result to the misconduct of Conflans rather than to the genius of Hawke, who was, besides, no favourite either of Pitt or Anson. Beyond a pension of £2,000 a year, he received no reward for that victory, the most complete, the most splendid in our naval annals between Gravelines and Trafalgar, whilst to the other circumstances attending it was added the special and altogether peculiar distinction that he fought it with—so to speak—a halter round his neck. Had he failed, os, in howling storm and among unknown rocks, he might well have failed, he would certainly have been cashiered, possibly shot, for disregard of the “ Fighting Instructions.” As it was, it was a brilliant finish to a very remarkable service.
In the spring of 1759 it was known in England that the French had collected troops in the Morbihan for the purpose of an expedition to England or Ireland. It was believed they were destined for England, and preparations were made in England to receive them. It was in many ways a remarkable year, and among others in this, that it gave rise to two of the most popular of our national songs. One of these was supposed to represent the homeward yearnings of a young soldier sent oft’ to the camp on Brighton Downs to wait for the coming of tho enemy:—
“I’m lonesome since I crossed the hill ■ And o’er the moor and valley, Such heavy thoughts my heart do fill Since parting with my Sally.
I seek no more the fine or gay, 1’or each does but remind me How swift the hours did pass away	.
With the girl I've left behind me.
*	*	*	«	*
Digitized by LnOOQle
240
THE 8TOBY OF THE SEA.
But now I'm bound to Brighton Camp, Kind Heaven, then pray guide me, And send me safely back agaiu
To the girl I’ve left behind me ”; »	*	»	*	♦
and so on for some half-dozen verses. The other, better known, perhaps, in its original form, addressed to both sailors and soldiers, ran:—
“ Come, cheer up, my lads, ’tis to glory we steer, To add something more to this wonderful year; Tis to honour we call you, as freemen, not slaves; For who are so free as we sons of the waves 1
*	•	*	*	*
We’ll still make them fear and we’ll still make them flee, And we'll drub them on shore as we’ve drubbed them at sea; Then cheer up, my lads, with one heart let us sing, Our soldiers, our sailors, our statesmen, our King.”
The forecast, however, was easy, for Rear-Admiral Rodney had burnt their flat-bottomed boats at Havre; and from May to November Hawke kept watch on Brest, so that not a ship could stir out. In former wars our fleets had sometimes looked at Brest, or cruised off it for a few days, but since the time of Sir Edward Howard, close on two hundred and fifty years before, no attempt to blockade it had been made. Hawke’s ships were, of course, a good deal larger and more wholesome than Howard’s had been, but Brest was also a much more formidable place in 1759 than it had been in 1513. Howard could anchor in Berteaumc Bay, and stay there as long as he liked or his provisions lasted. For Hawke's ships there was no rest without going off the station; but he provided for a regular and systematic refreshment of them at Plymouth, sending them in by twos, not to refit, but to let the men have a good all night in and a run on shore. By that, and by keeping a strict watch over the provisions that were supplied, by making the contractors' lives a burden to them, by inflexibly condemning bad beer and demanding good, he preserved the men in a very unusual state of health, while he kept Brest a sealed port.
It was only with the bad weather of November that he was compelled to take refuge for a time in Torbay. As soon as the gale moderated he put to sou again, to find that Conflans had done the same, and had gone round to Morbihan. Hawke followed, and caught sight of his enemy to the southward of Belle-Isle. It was open to Conflans to stand off the shore and meet the English fleet in the open sea. He judged it safer to go into Quiberon Bay, where the rocks and shoals would be a sure protection. Against many men they would have been. The navigation was known to be most dangerous, the English had neither chart nor sailing directions, and a fierce storm was blowing from the north-west. With a swoop said to be truly that of a Hawk, the English admiral boro in among the French. The master of the flag-ship
Digitized by LnOOQle
FIGHTING THE INVINCIBLE ARMADA (ft 237).
16
Digitized by LnOOQle
242
THE STORY GF THE SEA.
ventured on a remonstrance. He dwelt on their ignorance of the place, on the rocks, shoals, and raging storm, the approaching darkness. Hawke heard him and answered: “ You have done quite right in telling me this; it was your duty. Now place the ship alongside, that of the French admiral” The rest has been already told. It was a good many years before there was any more talk in France of invading this country’.
Digitized by LnOOQle
CHAPTER XI,
PERILS OF THE SAILOR’S LIFE
Peril* of the Sea Classified—Hurricanes—Apia Bay, March I Sth, 1889—Seven Ships of War crowded there —German, American, and English—Ruinous Jealousy—The Hurricane Breaks—What tiro Morning Revealed—Fate of the ESer, A'lpeir, and Adler— Captain Kane heads the Calliope for Sea—She Fights out inch by inch—The Cheer from the Trenton — She Gains the Open Seu—Fate of the Vandalia, Olya, and Trenton—" Hail, Columbia "—" Blood is Thicker than Water ”—Cyclones—Waterspouts—The Adventure of the Waeatrh—Foul of a Waterspout—Five Minutes’ Work—The Case of the Brig Nerina— A Sea Capsizes Her—The Crew in the Lazaretto—Their Sufferings—The Water Ebbs—An Unexpected Hand-shake—A Chain of Miracles—Derelicts—The Valli of Afton, Celeete, and Gloriana—Tho Tale of the London—A Fine Vessel Swamped—Tales of Heroism—Nineteen Souls Saved.
THE perils to which his calling exposes a seaman may be roughly divided into two classes—-those due to the violence of Nature, and those due to the carelessness or ignorance of man himself. In the days of buccaneers, pirates, and wreckers, man’s violence had also to be added as a cause; but nowadays it is probable that every disaster at sea can be placed in one or other of our two classes Of course, man’s carelessness or ignorance may combine, and, in fact, generally does combine, with Nature’s violence to produce a catastrophe. A ship, if properly handled in plenty of sea-room is a wonderfully safe place to inhabit, even in a violent storm; and Jack, when his vessel lays-to on the high seas, very often “ pities them poor folk ashore" with the slates and chimneypots flying about their ears. Still, there are several undoubted and unavoidable natural perils, A waterspout is one; a dense fog is another. Of human causes of suffering we may instance here defective compasses and charts, unseaworthy hulls, bad provisions, inaccurate reckonings, a sleepy look-out.
The commonest form of disaster at sea is, of course, the shipwrecking of a vessel upon land; but she may also be swamped and founder; or may capsize; or may be cut down and sunk by another vessel; or may be burnt In the following pages we propose to give some typical examples of each of these perils; and first, of a hurricane.
la the month of March, 1889, Samoa, in the South Pacific, was passing through a political crisis which had not only driven its inhabitants to arms, but had grown to be of importance in the counsels of Great Britain, Germany, and the United States. The two latter, indeed, were on the very verge of hostilities.
Sy the second week of March seven ships of war were crowded in Apia Hay, in the island of Apolu. This “ harbour ” is really no better than a
Digitized by LnOOQle
244
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
roadstead. Its shape has been compared by Mr. Stevenson * with that of a highshouldered jar or bottle with a funnel mouth. Its sides are almost everywhere of coral, for the barrier-reef not only runs out and forms the neck and mouth
And, just as in an ordinary wine - bottle the bottom is convexed inwards, so at Apia the shore reef runs out into the anchorage, and makes a danger ou s cape opposite the fairway of the entrance.
of the bottle, but skirts the beach and forms the bottom also.
The entrance itself is but three cables wide at the narrowest, and is formed by the fresh water of two small rivers bursting the coral reef “The formidable surf of the Pacific thunders both outside and in. There are days when speech is difficult in the chambers of shore-side houses; days when no boat can land, and when men are
broken by stroke of sea against the wharves. As I write these words, three miles in the mountains, and with the land breeze still blowing from the island summit, the sound of that vexed harbour hums in my ears.” Nevertheless, so mild is the climate of Samoa, and so regular the winds of the Pacific, that the island traders ride at anchor there all the year through. Of danger, when danger comes, the glass gives timely warning.
By the 15th of March the glass had given warning enough. The winter
had been break up. the 14th these two
unusually fine; but towards the middle of February it began, to On the 10th of that month a German brigantine went ashore.	On
sho was followed by an American brigantine and a schooner.	On
days, and again on March the 7th, the men-of-war had to steam to
their anchors. On the 15th, by 2 p.m., the barometer fell to 29° 11', and it was high time for every sail in the harbour to get away to sea with all speed but the commanders lying there on the verge of warfare would not give way to each other and quit their stations. Three of the ships were American—tho Nvpsic*
• “ A Footnote to History: Eight Years of Trouble in Samoa.” By Robert Louis Stevenson. CasseU 4 Co. (1892).
Digitized by LnOOQle
APIA HARBOUR. MARCH 18th, 1889. 245
the Vandalia, and the Trenton; the last-named carrying the flag of Rear-Admiral Kimberley. Three were German—the Adler, the Eber, and the Olga. One was British—the Calliope, Captain Kane. The anchorage was further crowded by six merchantmen and a number of small craft. Its capacity is estimated by Captain Kane at four large ships; and the latest arrivals, the Vandalia and Trenton were, in consequence, excluded, and lay without, in the passage. Of the seven warships, the seaworthiness of two was questionable: the Trenton's from an original defect in her construction, her hawse-pipes leading in on the
THE MKL£e IN APIA BAREOtIB (j). 246).
berth decks; the EbeVs from an injury to her screw in the blow of February the 14th. In this overcrowding of ships in an open entry of the reef, even the eye of a landsman could spy danger; and Captain-Lieu tenant Wallis of the Eber openly blamed and lamented, not many hours before the catastrophe, their helpless posture.
But neither side would stir. Rear-Admiral Kimberley, who (as the officer of highest rank) should have led the way, clung to his moorings; and the
Digitized by
Google
246
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
Germans were not to be beaten in obstinacy. Kane allowed himself to be persuaded by some of the residents in Apia, and stayed with the rest Topmasts were lowered, and the ships generally made snug.
As evening closed in, the rain descended in torrents and the wind began to rise. At midnight it was blowing a gale, and by four in the morning a hurricane. Day broke and showed enormous seas, “that might have awakened surprise and terror in the midst of the Atlantic,” pouring into the harbour’s mouth. Of the ships, the Trenton still held her own in the entrance; five-of the rest had dragged their moorings, and were tossing about near the shore in a close and helpless crowd. Three had already been in collision: the Olga was damaged in the quarter; the Adler had carried away her bowsprit; the Nipsic had lost her funnel, and tossed to and fro with the smoke and sparks
API*.
pouring along the level of her deck. The seventh warship, the Eber, had gone. With the rest she had dragged her anchors—her screw, as we have seen, was injured—a little before daybreak she struck twice on the coral and went down stern foremost. Four men only, of her whole complement of nearly eighty, were cast alive upon the beach.
By seven o’clock the Nipsic managed to shun the reef and run ashore upon a space of sand.
"By about eight it was the turn of the Adler. She was close down upon the reef. Doomed herself, it might yet be possible to save a portion of her crew; and for this end Captain Fritze placed his reliance upon the very hugeness of the seas that threatened him. The moment was watched for with the anxiety of despair, but the coolness of disciplined courage. As she rose on the fatal wave, her moorings were simultaneously slipped; she broached to in rising, and the sea heaved her bodily upward and cast her down with a concussion on the summit of the reef, where she lay on her beam ends, her back broken, buried in breaching seas, but safe. Conceive a table: the Eber in the darkness had been smashed against the rim and flung below; the Adler, cast free in the nick of opportunity, hod been thrown upon the top. Many were injured in the concussion; many tossed into the water; twenty perished. The survivors crept again on board their ship, as it now lay, and as it still remains, keel to the waves, a monument of the sea’s potency. In still weather, under
Digitized by
Google
THE CALLIOPE FIGHTS HER WAY OUT.
247
a cloudless sky in those seasons when that ill-named ocean, the Pacific, suffers its vexed shores to rest, she lies high and dry, the spray scarce touching her— the highest structure of man’s hands within a circuit of a thousand miles— tossed up there like a school-boy’s cap upon a shelf; broken like an egg: a thing to dream of.”
Three ship have thus been accounted for. Of the rest, one, the Trenton flag-ship, still held her own in the entrance; three—Calliope, Vandalia, and Olga—were near destruction. They were close to each other and close to the reef; the British Calliope nearest, with the American Vandalia a little ahead fin her port side, and the German Olga close a-starboard; the reef lay close behind her. Thus she had three perils to avoid at once. At one time her jib-boom collided with the Vandalia’s quarter; a moment later she was almost rammed in turn by the Olga. At nine o’clock it seemed that all was over, for the Vandalia came reeling back upon her, smashing her bowsprit. To avoid cutting her down, the Calliope must stop and even reverse her engines, and this with the fatal reef close under her kech Between the American ship and the reef it was destruction, and already to those on board it seemed that the Calliope's rudder was within ten feet of the coral. She was too heavy a vessel to take the leap which the Adler had taken. There was one hope for her, and one only—to push out. “ If the engines should stand, if they should have power to drive the ship against wind and sea, if she should answer the helm, if the wheel, rudder, and gear should hold out, and if they were favoured with a clear blink of weather in which to see and avoid the outer reef—there, and there only, were safety. Upon this catalogue of ' if’s ’ Kane staked his all.”
He called down to the engine-room to cram on every ounce of steam. Some of the machinery was already red-hot; but the order was obeyed. The Calliopes remaining cables were slipped, her helm ported to keep her clear of the Vandalia, and the struggle against wave and wind began. For some time no eye could perceive that she gained an inch. She seemed just to hold her own. Then, inch by inch, she drew ahead. At no time during that day did she make more than one sea-mile an hour: in this, the first stage of the struggle, she took more than two hours to cover less than four cables, or considerably less than one thousand yards. As she crept ahead, she was almost hidden from the watchers on shore by each gigantic billow. '
But yet another danger lay ahead. Right in the fairway of the entrance the Trenton still clung to her moorings—and that was all. Her rudder was broken, her wheel carried away; the hawse-pipes, of which we have already made mention, had deluged her decks, and her fires were now extinguished. She lay there and tossed, a sheer hulk, herself doomed to destruction, her unwieldy bulk a menace to the sorely bested Calliope. Between her and the reef lay Kane’s only path. Heading his vessel for the reef, he brought her close along within fifty yards of it, his fore-yard at the same time actually passing over the Trenton's quarter as she rolled, cut his way between the two
Digitized by GOOQle
248
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
perils, brought his vessel to the wind again, and laid her head for the open sea. "Not often in naval history was there a moment of more sickening
WRECK OF THE VANDALIA (p. 249).
peril, and it was dignified by one of those incidents that reconcile the chronicler with his otherwise abhorrent task. From the doomed flag-ship the Americans hailed the success of the English with a cheer. It was led by the old admiral in person, rang out over the storm with holiday vigour, and was answered by the Calliope with an emotion
easily conceived. This ship of their kinsfolk was almost the last external object seen from the Calliope for hours; immediately after, the mists closed about her till the morrow. She was safe at sea again—una de mriZtis—with a damaged fore-yard, and a loss of all the ornamental work about her bow and stern, three anchors, one kedge anchor, fourteen lengths of chain, four boats, the jib-boom, bob-stay, and bands
and fastenings of the bowsprit.
Let us return to the harbour. Captain Schoonmaker, of the Vandalia, perceiving how the Nipsic leached herself (as we have described) upon a space of sand, attempted to follow and beach his ship beside her. He managed to pass astern of the Olga; but here his luck ended.
At 10.45 the Vandalia bumped her stern upon the reef. Her head swung round to starboard, and she began to fill Efforts were made to get a line ashore, but without success. The crew, finding the deck a-wash, were driven to the tops. The captain bad already been swept overboard and drowned.
WRECK OF THE ADLER (p. 246).
Of the thirteen vessels—warships and merchantmen—that had lain in Apia Harbour but two were now left—the Olga and the Trenton. About three in the afternoon the latter parted her cables and was blown back, stern
Digitized by
Google
THE FATE OF THOSE THAT STAYED.
249
foremost, into the inner basin, “ ranging, plunging, and striking, like a frightened horse; drifting on to destruction for herself and bringing it to others.” The Olga, skilfully handled, contrived to fence with this new peril until four o’clock, when the ships collided, the Trenton falling back upon the Olga's hows, and carrying away two of her cables. But for this the Olga might
“THE AMEBIC ANS HAILED TUB . . . ENGLISH WITH A CHEER" (> 248).
have ridden out the storm. Now it was impossible, and the captain at once slipped the remainder of his moorings, and, going full steam ahead, managed to beach his ship in the most sheltered corner of the harbour. There now remained only the unmanageable Trenton, her quarters already severely cut by the collision. Guided apparently by an under-tow, she drifted to the southeast towards the spot where the ill-fated Vandalia lay submerged. As she approached, her stern more than once almost struck the coral Fortunately she came along slowly, and had time to throw rockets and lines to the
Digitized by LnOOQle
250
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
exhausted sailors huddled in the Vandalia's tops; and before the two wrecks struck, the men from the Vandalia's main and mizzen-mast were already on the Trenton's decks—very fortunately, for the collision sent these two masts by the board Those from the fore-mast were next taken off; and the Trenton gradually settled alongside her neighbour, against which she rolled and beat all night. Of her crew of four hundred and fifty only one perished; the Vandalia had lost forty-three.
“The morning of the 17th displayed a scene of devastation rarely equalled: the Adler high and dry, the Olga and Nipple beached, the Trenton partly piled on the Vandalia, and herself sunk to the gun-deck; no sail afloat, and
the beach heaped and the wreck of before the day had gallantly through the sub-
MAFAUTH POlXTt APIA.
high with the debris of ships mountain forests. Already Saumanu, the Chief of Apia, ventured forth by boat siding fury of the seas, and had succeeded in communicating with the Admiral; already, or soon after as the dawn permitted, rescue-lines were rigged, and the survivors were with difficulty and dan-
ger begun to be brought to shore. And soon the cheerful spirit of the Admiral added a new feature to the scene. Sur-
rounded as he was by the crews of two
wrecked ships, he paraded the band of the
Trenton, and the bay was suddenly enlivened with the strains of ‘ Hail, Columbia!”' On the 19th Captain Kane steamed back into Apia Bay, to find the Calliope the only survivor of the thirteen sail that had lain there on the lath. He thanked his crew—the engineers especially—in an affecting speech; nor did he forget to thank and compliment the Admiral “ My dear captain,” wrote Kimberley, "your kind note received.	You went out splendidly, and we
all felt from our hearts for you, and our cheers came with sincerity and admiration for the able manner in which you handled your ship. We could not have been gladder if it had been one of our ships, for in a time like that I can say truly with old Admiral Josiah Latnall, 1 that blood is thicker than water.”'
The disaster we have just related was really as much due to the folly of man as to the violence of the elements; for the barometer (which in Samoa varies less than with us) had given ample warning, and every ship in Apia Bay should have put to sea. The story that follows is of the danger quite unavoidable by the skill of man. Fortunately, it is also of the rarest.
The hurricane at Samoa was really a progressive circular storm or cyclone.
Digitized by
Google
THE ADVENTURE OF THE WASATCH.
251
The size of these cyclones varies a good deal, their effects in the tropics being frequently felt for 100 miles on either side of the vortex, and for even greater distances when the storm has advanced beyond the tropics and spread itself out
When such a storm happens on a very small scale, and can be measured in yards rather than miles, it is called a whirlwind; and a whirlwind will very often cause a waterspout Under ordinary circumstances, of course, clouds charged with moisture discharge it upon the earth as rain; but if a violent whirlwind catch this rain and spin it round in its vortex, the water will then fall in one great mass—a waterspout.
But if such a whirlwind occur over the sea its effect is doubled; for it not only collects the water from the clouds above, but sucks it up from the sea below, forming a gigantic column. The fate of any ship caught by this is almost as good as sealed. Only in the rarest cases has a ship been foul of a waterspout and survived. If a spout be seen from a ship at sea, and at a short distance, it is usual to fire a gun at it. If the spout be a small one, the shot may break the column mid bring down the water before it comes near enough to do much damage. But if she allow herself to be caught by the spout she will pretty certainly go down with all hands.
This rule, however, like most others, has its exceptions. Such an exception was the Wasatch, a ship of 1,600 tons, hailing from Boston, U.S.A. She was homeward bound with a cargo of sugar from the Philippine Islands, and was heading for the Straits of Macassar, between Borneo and Celebes—that is to s*y, she was on the point of crossing the Equator. The day was hot and cloudless; the wind scarcely filled the sails; and, except for the lazy swell rolling in from the Pacific, the sea was absolutely calm.
This, at any rate, was the state of affairs at eight o’clock in the morning. At half-past eight there was a small change. Sea and sky were calm and hot and brilliant as before; only to windward the edge of a black cloud was mounting the horizon. It came up rapidly, and at length spread in a heavy bank, parted every now and then by quick jets of lightning followed by long low thunder-peals. The lower edge of the cloud-bank was torn like tho bottom of a ragged curtain, and the ragged fringe was twisted and spun in every direction by the force of the whirlwind; and right in the middle of this tumult rose a gigantic waterspout.
Around the base of the spout the sea was extraordinarily agitated, running in short white waves, the crests of which were whipped off like smoke by the revolving wind. The waterspout, however, was not merely revolving; it was progressing, and at a furious speed. Already the crew of the Wasatch could hear its roaring. The danger lay dead to windward. All hands were sent swiftly aloft to get in top-gallant sails ; and as much canvas was got off the ship as the time—three or four minutes only—allowed ; and then the crew were called down upon deck. Meanwhile a gun had been run out, and a couple of shots sent at the column of water. The first missed it clean. The
Digitized by LnOOQle
252
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
second went right through it, but without effect Before a third could be fired the blow had descended.
As the waterspout swooped down, the uproar of thunder and vexed water became deafening and insufferable. The Wasatch was lifted up and flung nearly on her beam ends; the three masts bent like coach-whips, snapped and crashed overboard one after another. The next moment the waterspout was on board. It came down
“A COUPLE Of BHOTB ... AT THE COLUMN OF WATER ” (j>. 251).
with a louder roar than ever: one dense opaque black mass of water, blotting out the sky. Beneath it spars, timbers, and the limbs of men were crushed alike and horribly broken In less than half a minute all was over. The sky above the Wasatch was blue again, and the waterspout swiftly travelling away to leeward.
But what of the Wasatch ? Ten minutes before—five minutes before — she had been a smart and handsome three-masted ship — her masts piled high with white canvas to catch every breath of the tropical sky. Now her three
masts were shorn away close to the deck, the mainmast having torn open, as it fell, a great wound in the deck that gaped with ragged edges of timber ; the bowsprit was broken off close to the stem; the deck-house was gone; both bulwarks were carried away from the stem as far aft as the deadeyes of the mizzen shroud ; all the boats were stove in or swept away, and only eleven men were left out of a crew of twenty-five. The captain and mate were gone, the steward too, and the cook with the cook's galley. The captain’s small son was found dead and beaten shapeless and jammed into a corner of the companion. The hold was full of water, and its cargo of sugar all awash, and pouring over the ship’s side as she rolled.
Under the clear sky, however, the commotion of the water soon abated, the ship ceased to roll, and the survivors set to work. They manned the
Digitized by Google
THE CURIOUS CASE OF THE BRIG NERIXA.
253
pumps, and, setting a jury-mast, tried to get some canvas on her—enough, at any rate, to make her answer the helm. But before their work was done it came on to blow, and a nasty sea got up. Helpless as she was, and low in the water, the Wasatch’s last hour was seen to be near, when providentially a vessel hove in sight, took off the survivors, and landed them in Java
We have already given an instance of a ship capsizing in our account of the loss of the Captain. Here, however, is an instance more singular as well as less tragic:—
The brig Nerina, of Dunkirk, sailed from that place on Saturday, 31st of
OXS DKXSB OPACITE BLACK MASS OF WATER ” (p 252 .
October, 1840, under the command of Captain Pierre Everaert, with a cargo of oil and canvas for Marseilles. Her burthen was about 114 tons; the crew consisted of seven persons, including the captain and his nephew, a boy fourteen years old. At three o’clock in the afternoon of Monday, November 16th, they were forced to heave-to in a gale of wind at about ten or twelve leagues south-west of the Scilly Isles. At seven o’clock of the same evening, as she was still lying-to under close-reefed maintop-sail and balanced-reefed mainsail, a heavy sea struck the vessel, and she suddenly’ capsized, turning completely bottom up. There was only one man on the deck at the time; he was washed off and drowned. In the forecastle were three seamen, named Vincent, Vantaure, and Jean Marie; the two former caught hold of the windlass bits, and so got up close to the keelson and kept their heads above water. Poor
Digitized by
Google
254
THE STOKY OF THE SEA.
Jean Marie was not so fortunate; he must have been entangled in someway; for, after convulsively grasping Vantaure’s heel for a few seconds, he fell back into the water surging up through the companion, and was drowned. The other two, finding that the shock of the upset had started the bulkhead between the forecastle and hold, and that the cargo itself had fallen clown, on the deck, contrived to draw themselves along with their faces close against the keelson (it could not bo called on their hands and knees, for want of height) towards the stern of the ship, where they fancied they heard some voices.
The entire crew, as we know, numbered seven souls. Of these, two were by this time drowned, and two were clinging to the keelson. The remaining three, Captain Everaert, his nephew, and the mate, Jean Gallo, were below in the cabin at the time of the accident. The captain caught the boy in his arms, under the impression that their last moment had come. Recovering his wits, the mate wrenched open the trap hatch in the cabin floor (which had now become the ceiling) and, clearing out some casks which were jammed in the lazarette (a small triangular space between the cabin floor and the keelson, where stores are usually stowed away) scrambled up into it, took the boy from the hands of the captain, and drew up the captain after.
In about an hour they were joined by Vincent and Vantaure from the forecastle. We are now to imagine four men and a boy closely penned together in the lazarette, sitting in water up to their waists and obliged to bend their bodies for want of room overhead.
They had neither food nor water. They were only able to distinguish between day and night by the light in the sea striking up through the cabin sky-light, and thence into the lazarette through the trap-hatch in the cabin floor. Of course, they suffered terribly from lack of fresh air. Nevertheless, they held out through Tuesday and Wednesday, the 17 th and 18th, without food, without relief, almost without hope; but still each encouraged the others. They tried to stifle their hunger by chewing the bark stripped off from the hoops of the casks; and relieved the torture of their position a little by stretching themselves one at a time at full length on these casks, taking care to keep their heads close up to tho keelson, where the air was. The air, however, grew steadily worse. All through the two days and one night the mate worked almost incessantly to cut a hole with his knife through the hull; for he reasoned that, since the water had not crept quite up to the keelson, some of the hull must still be above water.
Happily the knife broke in his hand. Had he succeeded in making his hole, the vessel must instantly have gone down, as the confined air alone gave her buoyancy.
Other marvels were to follow. In the dead of the night of Wednesday, the 18th, the vessel struck upon something. At the third bump the stern dropped so much that all hands were forced to make their way, one by one, towards
Digitized byViOOQlC
A CHAIN OF MIRACLES.
255
the bowl In attempting this, poor Vincent slipped and was drowned, falling down through the cabin floor to the sky-light The others presently noticed that the water in the cabin was ebbing, and the mate Gallo dropped down into the cabin to seek for a hatchet to cut their way out; but while he was seeking the water rose again with great rapidity, and he was forced to scramble back into the lazaretto for his life. Another hour or two of suffering succeeded, and at length another day dawned, and by its faint light they saw that the vessel was fast on rocks, one of which projected up through the sky-light The captain now descended into the cabin, and found that the ship’s quarter was stove. He crept towards the rent, peeped through, and cried out gaily, “ Grace d Dieu, mes enfans, notes sommes aauves ! Je vois un homme <1 terre ! ” (" Thank God, my children, we are saved 1 I see a man ou the beach 1 ”)
A minute or two afterwards the man, attracted by tho wreck upon the rocks, drew near and thrust his hand through the hole. It was instantly seized and shaken effusively. The visitor at that moment must have been the most astonished num in the Scilly Islands. The narrative says that he almost died of fright.
But as soon as he recovered he ran to summon help. Several people of the neighbourhood were soon assembled; the side of the ship was cut open, and the four poor fellows were taken out of the living tomb in which they tad lain for three days and three nights. The spot where the brig went ashore is called Porthellick, in the island of St. Mary’s, Scilly. She must have been driven on the rocks soon after midnight, at about the time of high-water, and was discovered, lying dry, at about seven o’clock on Thursday morning, by a man accidentally passing along the cliffs. In another half-hour the returning tide would have sealed their fate. The body of Vincent was thrown on the tocks at a short distance from the wreck, and now lies in tho burial-ground at St Mary’s. Tho hull of the Nerina was, of course, a complete wreck, and soon went to pieces, and only a small portion of the cargo was saved. The survivors were treated by the Scillonians with the utmost kindness and hospitality, which they gratefully acknowledged.
But the most astonishing part of this astonishing story is still to come. It was afterwards found that in the afternoon of Wednesday, the 18th, the wreck, floating bottom up, was fallen in with by two pilot boats at about a league and a half from the islands. On the chance of salvage, these two plot-boats had actually taken her in tow for about an hour; but their towropes breaking, and night approaching, with a heavy sea running and every appearance of bad weather, they abandoned her, not having the least suspicion that there were human beings alive in the hold of the vessel, which was floating with a little more than her keel above water. And the distance she had been towed was just enough to bring her into the current which finally took her to Porthellick; otherwise the set of the tide would have drifted her clear of the islands into the vast Atlantic.
Digitized byVrOOQlC
256
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
On the face of it, a more improbable yarn was never spun in a long-shore tavern. It is true, nevertheless, and is thus certified between the seals of
Consular Agency of France:—" I, the undersigned
Lloyd's Agency and the
“OCT OP THE UTISC TOME ” (p. SS>
Richard Pearce. French Consular Agent and Agent to Lloyd’s at Penzance, having personally examined and taken the depositions of Gallo and Vantatire on the 25th of November, and Captain Everaert and the boy Nissen on the 24th of December, on their landing at this place from Scilly, and having also conversed with several of the inhabitants of the islands (amongst others Augustus Smith, Esq., the Lord Proprietor), some of whom actually assisted in towing the Nerina, as she floated bottom up, on the 18th, ■whilst others were present at and assisted in cutting open the quarter of
the vessel and liber-
ating the poor fellows
on the 19th of November, hereby certify the correctness
of the whole of the
foregoing statement. Dated Penzance, 24th of December, 1840." '
Now had the Nerina, with four corpses in her hold, drifted out into the Atlantic, she might have wandered there to and fro until her timbers rotted. There are scores of such half-submerged craft tramping the ocean, and these form a standing peril to fast-going ships. They are scattered like shoals over
Digitized by LnOOQle
FLOATING DERELICTS.
257
the face of the sea; and they are worse than shoals, because their bearings cannot be taken, and their position is perpetually shifting. In Mr. Clark Russell's words, “ The most anxious vigilance, the most dexterous eye-sight, cannot, even in the day-time, provide against a collision with a hull submerged to a point that prevents the passing vessel from seeing any portion of her until she is upon and into her. Darkness multiplies the risk. A derelict may, under certain conditions of weather during night-time at sea, be under a ship’s bows without her people seeing her or supposing there is anything near
PUHTHELLICK HAY.
them for leagues and leagues. You need only conceive the resistance which a huge partially-submerged mass, with a hold choked full of timber, would offer to a steamer rushing at her through the darkness at twelve or thirteen knots an hour, to realise the consequences of such a crash. It would be like striking an iceberg, and it is impossible to doubt that many a fine vessel has foundered and carried all hands with her through coming in collision with one of these rock-like lumps of wreckage, which are at all times in the ocean.” If you visit the Custom House of any of our seaports, you will find its walls covered with notices warning master-mariners that such and such a wreck is floating or lying submerged in such and such a latitude and longitude, more or less, to the danger ot shipping. But more ought to be done. The ultimate end of the British navy is to protect British commerce upon the sea; and these derelicts are as real a danger to trading ships as ever an enemy's frigates or privateers in time of war. It is hard to see how a Government 17
Digitized by GOOQle
258
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
vessel could be better employed than, in exercising its guns, torpedoes, and submarine explosives in clearing the seas of these tramps. Luckily the Admiralty seems to be waking up to this duty; and, as iron replaces wood in the construction of our ships, these derelicts are bound to grow scarcer, since iron ships, like Falstaff, have “ an alacrity at sinking,"
The movements of these derelicts are surprisingly irregular; the distances they cover are very often enormous The American schooner Wyer G. Sargent, for instance, was wrecked on March 31st, 1891, off Cape Hatteras, in N. lat. 35° W. long. 75°, or thereabouts. By May 4th she had travelled about 600 miles to the eastward. She then doubled back some 300 miles before she was sighted again on June Sth. Two days later she was within 150 miles of Cape Hatteras. She now began to travel north, off' the American coast; but on June 19th took a sudden shoot E.N.E., and was sighted on July 2nd, after a voyage of 900 miles, as far north as lat. 40°. Then during the next thirteen days followed another voyage of 800 miles; and after that her movements become altogether too bewildering. By December, 1892, she had doubled on her tracks at least five times, and had reached the middle of the Atlantic, her latitude being now approximately 29° N. At one time she was only 800 miles off Madeira. .
Such derelicts are frequently boarded, but the boarders usually find that somebody has been there before. A captain is seldom lucky enough to come across such a find as the Falls of Afton. This large iron English ship was picked up by a Frenchman some 280 miles from Madeira, and conveyed back to that island. She had on board 2,500 tons of railway sleepers, 150 of pig-iron, 150 tons of Smith’s coal, and 250 tons of coke—a nice little salvage haul. A more romantic derelict was the American brig Celeste. She was found in the Mediterranean staggering about aimlessly in the wind, with all sails set, but no one at the wheel. When boarded, there was a tire burning in the galley; dinner was set out in the cabin, the joint on the table uncut, and not yet quite cold; there were some child’s toys in the cabin, and a piece of a woman’s dress was still under the needle of a sewing-machine. Yet there was not a soul on board, nor a boat within the circle of the horizon. Mr. Russell obtained this engaging account from an American paper. As he says, the easiest way to solve the riddle is—disbelieve the story. ,
The story of the Gloriana, however, is not less extraordinary. She was sighted in August, 1775, among icebergs in about 77’ N. latitude. The captain of a Greenland whaler, as he turned the comer of a channel between two immense masses of ice, sighted a brig ahead, sailing the same course as his own, but at her own sweet will. Her rigging was all of a tangle; her sails mouldy and dropping. Soon she grounded upon the ice and the whaler overhauled her. Ho could now see that her deck was heaped with snow and her bull scarred with innumerable ice cuts. He lowered a boat and hailed her, but got no reply. So be prepared to step aboard, when his attention was
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE LONDON.
259
drawn to an open port-hole near the main chains. He looked in and saw a man inside—a man frozen stiff and dead, seated at his cabin table with a logbook before him and a pen frozen to his fingers. The last entry in the log, as the whaling captain found when he summoned up courage to enter the cabin, was dated November 11th, 1762—that is to say, thirteen years before. Other bodies were found in the ship, including that of a woman stretched in a bunk, and a mon lying beside a tinder box, with the tinder all ready beside him. There were no provisions at all in the ship. The log-book was brought home, and recognised by the owners of the Glorwna.
Such at least is the tale, which at this distance of time can neither be confirmed nor disproved. Let us proceed to well-authenticated illustrations of the sailor’s perils.
We have said that in fair sea-room a properly-hand led ship is one of the safest places in the world to inhabit, even though it be blowing great guns. It is rarely, indeed, that a vessel of any tonnage capsizes as the Nerina did; she has only two sources of alarm—wind and sea Now for a vessel to capsize, as the Nerinn capsized, is extremely rare. It is still more rare for a vessel of decent tonnage to be tnoarnped by the sea. Vessels, indeed, are often lost by great leakage produced by collision; but it is seldom that ordinary leakage or water shipped on deck makes any difference to a well-found ship; and in steamships the pumps worked by a “donkey-engine” prevent, as a rule, any danger from these sources. There is one case, and one only, on record of a first-class steamship being literally swamped at sea.
The London, in the year 1865, was about the finest passenger steamship afloat. She was nearly new, of 1,700 tons, and valued at £80,000. She belonged to a well-known firm : had been constructed on the most approved principles; and had already made two successfur voyages under Captain Martin, *m officer of considerable experience. Such was her reputation that months before the time of sailing berths were eagerly booked, and in the saloon there were no vacancies left. One lady, indeed, who wished to travel with her family from Plymouth to Melbourne, had made repeated applications to the owners’ agents, and the captain was consulted, but declared that the cabins were so foil that he could not possibly accommodate her—a disappointment for which she had afterwards reason to feel thankful.
The London left the East India Docks on the 29th December, 1865. The weather, however, was so severe that she remained at anchor at the Nore during part of the 30th and the whole of the 31st. On New' Year’s Day the weather did not greatly improve, and, after getting out into the Channel, the pilot decided to take the vessel for shelter to Spithead. As soon us the weather abated, she went on to Plymouth, arriving there on January 5 th. Here one of the passengers, who had been particularly alarmed at the weather on the way down, went ashore, resigned his passage, and returned to his home —thus, as it turned out, saving his life. But there are always many such
Digitized by GOOQle
260
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
miracles of preservation in the history of every great catastrophe. In this case there is a story told of a young man who had quarrelled with his family, run away from home and taken a passage by the London. He was advertised for in the Times, and implored to return, his friends at first being ignorant of his whereabouts. Getting a clue, however, they sent down to Plymouth; the youth was detected among the passengers of the London, and after some persuasion gave up the voyage.
At Plymouth the London met with her first misfortune. The small boat from the Plymouth pilot-cutter, having on board the pilot and his assistant, was swamped. The latter was rescued by a boat from the London, but the pilot was drowned. The remainder of the 5th was occupied in shipping her
complement of passengers and filling up with coal She sailed the same evening, in moderate weather. On the 6th and 7 th of January the wind rose, with strong squalls and a high sea; and the ship rolled a good deal The weather was not so bad but that divine service was held on the 7th, it being Sunday. On Monday, the 8th, the wind blew a gale from the south-west; and on Tuesday increased to a violent gale, with a very heavy sea, the ship going under steam only and at the reduced rate of two knots an hour. She was pitching violently and taking whole seas over her bows. At 7 am. a big sea broke into the lifeboat stowed on the port-quarter, filled her completely, and carried her overboard with all her gear, At 9 am. the ship drove her nose into the sea so heavily that she carried away the jib and flying-jibbooms, and these took with them the fore-topmast and foretop-gallant, fore-royal and main-royal masts, with all their spars, sails, and rigging. The masts fell inboard, and hung entangled in the rigging; but the jibbooms remained under the bows, fastened to the ship by their wire stays. All efforts to get them clear failed until the next morning, for all night the gale continued, and the seas kept constantly washing all forward. When Wednesday, the 10th, dawned, the
Digitized by Google
SWAMPED AT SEA.
261
gale was blowing as furiously as ever. Already, at 3 a.m., Captain Martin had given orders to get up full steam, as be intended to put back to Plymouth to refit The ship’s course was accordingly shaped for home; the fore and mizzen stay-sails were set as she steamed along at the rate of five or six knots. During the morning the wrecked masts, which until now had been swinging about aloft, were secured, and the wreck of the jibboom cleared away. Observations taken that day indicated that she was about 200 miles from the Land’s End. At 6 p.m. both fore and mizzen stay-sails went before a squall; another lifeboat and the cutter were washed overboard. At 9 p.m. the wind increased to a hurricane from the north-west, the squalls being incredibly savage. The engines were stopped, and the ship put under the main-topsail only, which
COURSE OF THS DERELICT SCHOONER FANXIE £. B'PLSTON.
was soon blown into shreds. Once more the engines were set in motion. Up to this time, in spite of the heavy seas, the London had not shipped much water.
But at half-past ten at night a tremendous sea arched itself over the weather, or port, gangway and descended almost vertically over the hatch of the engine-room, smashing it and admitting many tons of water, together with two men it had washed from the deck. The fires were extinguished at once. In about eight minutes the engines ceased to work. The water rose above the waists of the engineers, and they escaped as well as they could. The large bilge-pumps proved useless, and the ship laboured like a log in the trough of the sea, rolling gunwales under. The captain called to the men who were baling, “ Put down your buckets, and come and try to secure the engine-room hatch; it’s our only chance of saving the ship!” But- no endeavours availed to replace the batch. They tried to stop the opening with sails, mattresses, and spars, again without success ; and, although the donkey-engine and pumps were kept going, the water steadily gained. The saptain saw it and said, “ Boys, you may say your prayers I ”
Digitized by LnOOQle
262
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
At 4 am., of the 11th, the ship pooped a sea which stove in four windows, or stern ports, of the upper cabin. Through them the water rushed in, and . soon half-filled the ’tween decks, and the ship began to settle fast. The captain, with Mr. Greenhill, the engineer, went into the engine-room, took soundings, found fourteen feet of water, and at once said there was no hope. The news was soon broken to the passengers. At about 10 a.rn. the surviving boats were ordered to be got ready, and the iron starboard pinnace was lowered into the	water, .but	was immediately upset	and lost. Shortly after	t
the captain went	into the saloon and said, "Ladies,	there is no hope for us,
I am afraid. Nothing short of a miracle can save us I ”	^
A Mr. Draper,	a Wesleyan	minister, was in the cabin, and the women about	|-<
him reading their	Bibles, with	their children grouped	around. At the captain's	'^
announcement Mr. Draper	stood erect, and, with a firm voice, the tears stream-	^
ing from his eyes, said:	“The captain tells us there is no hope—that we	'•■
must all perish—but I tell you there is hope for all I ’’ Mrs. Draper at the	t
last moment handed her	rug to one of the seamen who was attempting to	3
get oft’ in a boat. He	asked her what she would do without it. She	fl
replied, “ It will only bo for a few moments longer ■ ”	n
Men and women behave curiously at such a time as this. One passenger	£
rushed on deck labouring with a heavy carpet bag, which he expected to	^
save with his life. When the only boat which got off safely was lowered, a	\
lady entreated to be taken on board, offering a thousand guineas as a reward.	I
Millions could not have saved her. One man who might have escaped refused,	i
declining to leave his wife and children. Among the passengers was an actor of	. _
great distinction in his day, Gustavus V. Brooke. He was a tall man of great	]
strength, which he had almost exhausted in working at the'pumps. The Dutch	'
portion of the creiv, twenty-one in number, refused to work, and went off to their berths and there remained; so that the passengers had to turn to	I
and work with tho English seamen. Brooke toiled incessantly: dressed only	,
in a red Crimean shirt and trousers, bareheaded and barefooted, he worked	\
until work was useless; and when last seen, about four hours before the steamer went down, he was leaning calmly upon one of the half-doors of the companion; his chin was resting upon both hands, and his hands were on the top of the door, which he gently swayed to and fro, while he watched the scene with grave composure.
At 2 p.m. the vessel was sinking rapidly. Captain Martin, seeing that the port cutter was ready for lowering, ordered Mr. Greenhill into it. “ There’s not much chance for the boat,” he said; “there is none for the ship. Your duty is done; mine is to remain here.” When the boat was lowered the captain was asked to climb down into her. He said, “ No; I will go down with the passengers; but I wish you God-speed and safe to land' ”
The boat, into which the captain had thrown a compass, and to the crew of which he had shouted their course, “N.N.E. to Brest'” pushed off none too
Digitized by
Google
"THE BOAT . . . PUSHED OFF NONE TOO SOON” (p. 262).
5
Digitized by GOOQle
Digitized by GOOQle
NINETEEN SURVIVORS
263
soon. Scarcely had they gone eighty yards, when the stern of the London plunged beneath the waves, with crew, passengers, and all Her bows stood upright for a moment or two exposing the keel as far as the foremast Through the howling of the storm not a sound'could be heard from the crowd of two hundred and more upon deck. Those in the boat saw a portion of this crowd swept off by a gigantic sea, and then the remaining boat, full of people, was drawn down in the vortex of the sinking ship. The third officer, Mr. Arthur Angel, a young man of twenty, was observed still at his post by the pumps as she went down. The next minute the tremendous billows were rolling unbroken over the place whero the London had been.
The port cutter held nineteen souls—the first, second, and third engineers, one midshipman, and three passengers (all second class; no first class er steerage passengers whatever were saved). They had no food but a few biscuits. They were drenched byv every sea. And thus they drifted about for twenty hours. Then they fancied they saw a ship through the gloom, and lifted their voices together. Their hail was heard, and returned; but the night was P'tch black, and they had no light to show. The ship tacked again and again
111 the hope to find them. At last, to their agony, she stood off and was swallowed up in the darkness; but at dawn another ship was sighted on the horizon. They hoisted a shirt for a signal, and rowed towards her with all ■heir remaining strength. In five hours' time they were on board the Italian barque Maruinople, and in due course carried to Falmouth and landed in safety.
Digitized by LnOOQle
CHAPTER XII.
TALES OF BOMBARDMENT AND BLOCKADE.
Ships as Floating Batteries—Omar Pasha, Dey of Algiers, and his Atrocities—They are Past Bearing—Lord Exmouth Sails from Plymouth—His Fleet—Target Practice—Arrive at Algiers—No Answer to Lord Exmouth'a Demands—The Bombardment of Algiers—Hot Work—The Dey Gives In—The Prisoners Released—Further History of Lord Exmouth—How He Saved tho Dutton, East Indiaman —The Bombardment of Alexandria—“ Well Done, C'owdor .'"—Blockades^-The Great Blockade of 1807—Tho Blockade of the War of Secession—Blockade Running—Hobart Pasha—A Cargo of Cotton—Saved by a Ripple—Blockade Running in a Sailing Vessel—Captain Watson and the Sub Roy— Whistling for a Breeze—A Cruiser in Chase—Almost Captured in a Calm—The Wind Springs Up—A Clean Pair of Heels.
WHEN all is said and done, the simplest purpose of a man-of-war is to act as a platform for carrying guns; and a moment’s reflection makes it obvious that her services need not be confined to the pounding of another vessel till she sinks or surrenders. Given certain conditions, a battle-ship makes an excellent movable battery for the bombardment of a town; as we will proceed to show.
In the early spring of 1816 that sturdy seaman, Edward Pellew, Viscount Exinouth, took a squadron to Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli, and procured tho release of one thousand seven hundred and ninety-two Christian slaves. He also pressed upon the Dey of Algiers, Omar Pasha, the total abolition of Christian slavery. The Dey gave evasive answers, but at length promised to treat; and upon this promise the British admiral returned to England, where his crews were disbanded and his frigates dismantled.
The wings of our ships were scarcely furled before the Dey broke out with a fresh and peculiarly fiendish atrocity. His own temper was of the shortest, and his subjects, smarting under the loss of their slaves (although, by the way, they had been allowed to receive 400,000 dollars compensation from Sicily and Sardinia) did not suffer it to sleep. It happened that, ten years-before, the English Government had contracted with the Algerines for the occupation of the town and harbour of Bona os a depot for the Italian coral fishery, tobe carried on under the protection of the British flag. On the 23rd of May, 1816, between 300 and 400 bright sailed Italian boats lay off Bona. Their crews were mostly on shore, preparing to celebrate high mass, it beingAscension Day. Suddenly a gun was fired from the Castle above, a horde of
Digitized byVvOOQlC
AN OUTRAGE BEYOND BEARING.
265
Janissaries rushed down on the coral-fishers and slew all they met; while at the same time a regiment of cavalry galloped along the shore, sabreing as they went. The whole fleet of fishing-boats was sunk by the guns of the forts, and hardly a man of their crews escaped. The British flag was hauled down and trampled upon, and the British Vice-Consul’s house sacked and gutted.
This was more than flesh and blood could stand, and Lord Exmouth was ordered at once to man his fleet and put to sea again, with instructions to batter this city of pirates into submission. Algiers, however, was a place of
ALGIERS.
considerable strength. Indeed, the whole of the guns mounted for its defence by sea and land are said to have exceeded 1,000. The batteries on the Mole alone mounted at least 220 guns; and the Arab artillerymen were brave and knew how to shoot In the debates at home Lord Cochrane, who ought to have known better, asserted that the Algerines had no cannon, and could not use them if they had, and that two sail of the line were ample to knock terms, out of the Dey. Nelson, on the other hand, was reported to have named (under incorrect information, it is true) twenty-five ships as a proper force.
On Sunday, the 21st of July, 1816, Lord Exmouth sailed from Portsmouth in his 100-gun ship, the Queen Charlotte. At Plymouth he picked up the Impregnable (98 guns), and the Minden, Superb, and Albion, seventy-fours. He had also the Leander (50 guns) and four gun-frigates, besides small craft.
Digitized by LnOOQle
266 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
At noon on the 28th the fleet weighed from Plymouth Sound, and stood straight for Gibraltar with a fine northerly wind at its back.
No sooner was Plymouth down below the horizon than Lord Exmouth gave orders that the seamen should be exercised at the guns twice a day, while every Tuesday and Friday the signal was made to prepare for action, and each ship fired six broadsides. Besides this general exercise, the first and second captains of the Queen Charlottes guns were daily trained at a target made of laths three feet square, in the centre of which hung a piece of wood shaped like a bottle, with yarns criss-crossed so that a 12-pound shot could not pass through without cutting the yarn. By the time the fleet reached Gibraltar the target was never missed, and the average number of bottles hit daily was ten out of fourteen. At gun-fire on Friday, the 9th of August, our fleet was opposite Trafalgar, and by two o’clock that afternoon cast anchor in Gibraltar Bay. Here they found lying five Dutch frigates and a corvette, under Vice-Admiral A’an de Cappellan, a thin-faced and amiable old gentleman, who at once offered the services of his squadron. They were accepted. Lord Exmouth lost no time. He had the cabins removed from the lower decks to leave room for the guns; all useless lumber was sent on shore; and fresh supplies brought on board with a view to sailing on the 12th. The marines were exercised in the boats and at a landing practice.
On the 11th, however, a strong levanter blew, and, continuing over the 12th, kept the fleet at its moorings. On the 14th the wind shifted to the southward, and the fleet weighed and set sail On the 16th they were joined by the corvette Prometheus (Captain Dashwood), from Algiers, having on board the wife, daughter, and infant child of the British Consul, Mr. McDonell The consul himself had been seized and chained in his own house, and eighteen men of the Prometheus had been sent off into the interior as slaves. Mrs. McDonell and her daughter had with difficulty escaped, disguised in midshipmen’s clothes; but through the treachery of its Jew nurse the baby was seized while being carried to the boat concealed in a basket, and detained. The Dey, however, sent it off next morning, an act which (says Lord Exmouth), "as a solitary instance of his humanity, ought to be recorded by me.”
The Dey, it may be remarked, scoffed at the proposed bombardment. “ As for their shells,” he told a Danish merchant captain, pointing to his ceiling, where fruit was hanging for the winter, “ I shall hang them up in my rooms like those melons." “You don’t appear,” said the Dane, “to know what the English shells are. I was at Copenhagen when Nelson came there, and I know what they are like.” •
A tedious head-wind baffled the ships, and it was not until the 26th that they made Cape Cazzina. At daybreak, on the 26th the domes and minarets, white terraces and olive-gardens, of Algiers rose before them in the morning sunshine, with the peaks of the Lesser Atlas like a cloud in the far distance. The wind had almost failed, and Lord Exmouth took the opportunity to
Digitized by LnOOQle
LORD EXMOUTH'S MESSAGE TO THE DEY.
267
dispatch Lieutenant Samuel Burgess with a flag of truce and a letter containing Lord Exmouth’s demands, which were these:—
The abolition of Christian slavery and the delivery of all Christian slaves in the kingdom of Algiers.
The repayment of all the money lately exacted for the ransom of Neapolitan and Sardinian slaves.
Peace with the King of the Netherlands.
And the immediate liberation of the British Consul and the two boats' crews of the Prometheus.	,
With Lieutenant Burgess went Salame, the interpreter to the fleet, a good-1 wking young Egyptian, not remarkable for his courage. As this youth went down the Queen Charlotte’# side, the officers called after him, "Salam^.if you bring back word that the Dey gives in, and won’t fight, we shall have to kill you instead of him.” It was nine in the morning when the boat containing the lieutenant, Salami, and six seamen, all secretly armed with muskets (on the very likely chance of treachery), pulled towards the Mole. The captain of the port came out in a boat to meet them, and taking Lord Ex mouth’s letter (which was handed to him at the end of a long stick), promised an answer within two hours. He also invited the interpreter to come on shore; but Salome had too much regard for his own head, and preferred to wait in the boat in the heat and glare. Meanwhile, a breeze having sprung up from the sea, the fleet stood into the bay, and lay-to about a mile from the city. The men spent their time in conning its defences. The whole place bristled with guns. On the north side of the city were mounted about eighty pieces of cannon and six or eight huge mortars; but the shallow water would hardly allow a heavy ship to. approach to within reach of them. Between the north wall and the heel of the pier connecting the town with the lighthouse-were about twenty more guns. At the northern end of the Mole stood a semicircular battery, with two tiers of forty-four guns; a little to the southward of this, the lighthouse battery mounted three tiers of forty-eight guns. Then came the long eastern battery, showing sixty guns and flanked by four other batteries, of two tiers each, mounting altogether sixty guns; and on the south head of the Mole stood two terrifying 68-ponnders, each twenty* feet long. A little to the west, upon a small pier, stood the Fish Market battery of tifteep guns; and between this and the south end of the city came two small batteries of four or five guns each ; and, still further on, a castle and two or three other batteries, mounting between them some sixty or seventy guns.
Under these batteries—and, indeed, within pistol-shot of the walls—the boat waited three hours and a half in the heat of the day. Thousands of the Dey’s warriors—Turks, Arabs, Moors, and other swarthy and forbidding specimens of the Faithful-—crowded the embrasures of the walls and watched its perspiring occupants, from time to time playing upon their nerves by pointing hostile matchlocks at them and pretending to take deliberate aim. Within the city—
Digitized by Goode
268
THE STORY OF THE SEA,
in street and court and market—the Dey’s troops were forming; and thirty-six Algerine vessels, with their red silk battle-flags flying, were brought out from inside the Mole and drawn up in a hollow square at the point where the batteries were fewest
At 2 p.m., no answer being sent by the Dey, Lieutenant Burgess hoisted the signal to that effect, and pulled away from the shore, half-expecting every
“the boat waited” (p. 267)
moment to have his boat scuttled by a round-shot Lord Exmouth, seeing this, at once hoisted his signal to know if all the ships were ready. It was hardly flying before every ship had the affirmative flag at the masthead; and the fleet bore up to the attack, Queen Charlotte leading. As his boat’s crew came on board, all that Lord Exmouth said was, “ Never mind, we shall see now.” He then turned to his officers and ordered them to be ready, ■
At 2.35 P.M. the Queen Charlotte came to anchor within eighty yards of the Mole head batteries; but, finding she had only two feet of water under her keel, the cable was let go for another twenty yards. The fleet cheered as Lord Exmouth took up his position in such masterly style that not half a.
Digitized by GOOQle
THE FIRST SHOT.
269
dozen guns from the Mole could bear on his ship, though it was exposed to the other batteries and, of course, to the musketry fire. The other vessels followed in excellent order, and took up their stations with precision; the
Leander on the Queen Charlotte's larboard-bow, with her after-starboard guns bearing on the mouth of the Mole, and her foremost ones upon the Fish Market battery; ahead of her the Severn, with the whole of her starboard guns
bearing on the
same battery;
rear of the Queen Charlotte
the Superb, Minden, Albion, and Impregnable, stretching from the Mole head towards the north-east. The Dutch squadron took up its station against the batteries to the south of the city. As these great ships sailed down under the Moorish batteries, the Algerines at first stood still with astonishment, then leaped up on the parapets to look. They had made sure of intimidating the English, and expected nothing so little as this prompt and cool attack. Indeed, the most of their guns were not loaded until almost all the fleet had passed under the batteries. For minutes a deep silence reigned; and then, at last, just as the British Admiral was lashing his ship to the mainmast of an
close to the Severn the Glasgow; and in the
“ SHOOK Hid DRAWN SCIMITAR" (p. 270).
Algerine brig fast to the shore at the mouth of
the Mole, a shot was sent at him; and, almost at the same moment, two shots were fired from the eastern battery at the Impregnable and her comrades as they advanced to their stations. The instant he saw the smoke of the gun, Lord Exmouth, with characteristic humanity, waved his hand to the astonished crowd on the parapets, to warn them to get behind their defences, and then turned to his men and cried: “ That will do. Fire away, my fine fellows I ”
The words were hardly spoken before the Queen Charlotte had let off their starboard broadside. It is said that this first volley killed or wounded more than five hundred Algerines. They said afterwards it was “ like hell opening upon them.” As the smoke cleared away, scores of the survivors were seen
Digitized by LnOOQle
270
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
crawling away on all-fours like dogs. Within a minute or so, two more English ships had opened fire, and soon the whole fleet was giving tongue, and the four bomb-vessels began their tremendous discharges, as did also the battering flotilla, commanded by Captain Mitchell, and consisting of gunboats, mortar-boats, launches with carronades, rockct-boats, barges, and yawls —in number fifty-five.
With such splendid precision did the Queen Charlotte fire, that her third broadside levelled the south end of the Mole to its foundations. She then brought her guns to bear upon the batteries over the town-gate leading into the Mole. Soon gun after gun came tumbling over the battlements; and when the last gun fell, just as its artillerymen were in the act of discharging it, one of the Algerine chiefs leaped upon the ruined parapet and shook his drawn scimitar at the ship. In his narrative of the bombardment, Salami also speaks of two 12-pounders, hoisted on the main and fore-tops, which poured in two hundred and eighty musket-balis at each discharge.
As for our sailors, they worked like madmen. Some, when the wadding failed, cut up their blue jackets and rammed them down the guns. On the Severn the seamen’s wives formed a line and passed up shot and powder to their husbands. Each fresh collapse of an Algerine battery, or firing of an Algerine frigate, was greeted with a round of cheers. The smoke of the conflict darkened the sun; and time after time, when Lord Exmouth wished to cease firing for a moment, to let the smoke clear away and make observations, it was all that he could do to make his men desist.
The Leander, being excellently placed, quickly cut to pieces the Algerine gun-boats and galleys. In return, she received a heavy punishment from the guns of the Fish Market; while the Impregnable suffered heavily from the eastern battery, losing in all fifty seamen and marines, and having one hundred and sixty wounded. The Glasgow, too, was severely raked by the Fish Market and neighbouring batteries.
To quote Lord Exmouth's dispatch:—“Thus commenced a fire as animated and well-supported, I believe, as was ever witnessed, from a quarter before three until nine, without intermission, and which did not cease altogether until half-past eleven. Never did the British flag receive more zealous and honourable support. To look further on the line than immediately around me was impossible; but so well-grounded was my confidence in the gallant officers I had the honour to command that my mind was kept perfectly free to attend to other objects, and I knew them to be in their stations only by the destructive effect of their fire upon the walls and batteries to which they were opposed. I had about this time the satisfaction of seeing Vice-Admiral Van Cappci Ian's flag in the station I had assigned to him, and soon after, at intervals, the remainder of his frigates keeping up a well-supported fire on the flanking batteries he had offered to cover us from.”
During the seven hours the firing lasted, Lord Exmouth, though a man of
Digitized by
Google
THE BOMBARDMENT OF ALGIERS.
271
sixty-five and of full habit, kept running about the deck with a white handkerchief tied round his waist, a little round hat on the back of his head, and a telescope under his arni, bawling orders and skipping about like a middy. He received but two trivial wounds—one in the cheek, the other in the leg; but it takes a miracle to explain how he escaped so lightly, for his coat was slit with musket-bails as if somebody had been slashing at it with a pair of scissors. But the Queen Charlotte was placed at such a beautiful angle that site
lost but eight men altogether, though lying close to the Mole and within range of thousands of Moorish marksmen. She herself expended no less than thirty thousand four hundred and twenty-four pounds of powder and four thousand four hundred and sixty-®« rounds of big shot. Mr. Stone, her gunner, an old man of seventy, ’rho had been through thirty actions, said he had never before spent so much powder in one day. Some of the guns at length grew too hot to be used without danger; others recoiled mid ploughed deep troughs in the deck. The Congreve rockets did excellent 'fork. At first the Algerines took them for signals, until they begun to burst and scatter death. Their iron bolts plunged into the narrow streets wd shed among the wooden houses a
LOUD EXMOUTH* (From tie PainEiup ty IE Oiwn, P,A.)
fire that seemed to soak in like oil and
burn the fiercer for the water poured on it.
To return to Lord Exmouth’s dispatch :—'• There were awful moments during the conflict occasioned by firing the Algerine ships so near us, and I had long resisted the eager entreaties of several around mo to make the attempt upon the outer frigate, distant about one hundred yards, which at length I gave in to, and Major Gossett, by my side, who had been eager to land his corps of marines, pressed me most anxiously for permission to accompany Lieutenant Richards in the ship’s barge. The frigate was instantly boarded, and in ten minutes in a perfect blaze. A gallant young midshipman, in rocket-boat number eight, although forbidden, was led by his ardent spirit to follow in support of the barge, in which he was desperately wounded, his brother-officer killed, and nine of his crew. The barge, by rowing more rapidly, had suffered less, and lost but two. The enemy's batteries around my division were about ten o’clock silenced, and in a state of perfect ruin and dilapidation, and the fire of the ships was reserved as much as possible to save powder, and to reply
Digitized by
Google
272
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
to a few guns now and then bearing upon us, although a fort on the upper angle of the city, on which our guns could not be brought to bear, continued to annoy the ships by shot and shell during the whole time.
“The flotilla of mortar, gun, and rocket-boats, under the direction of their respective artillery officers, shared to the full extent of their power in the honour of the day, and performed good service; it was by their fire all the ships in the port (with the exception of the outer frigate) were in flames, which extended rapidly over the whole arsenal, storehouses, and gunboats, exhibiting a spectacle of awful grandeur and interest.
" The sloops of war which had been appropriated to aid and assist the ships of the line, and prepare for their retreat, performed not only their duty well, but embraced every opportunity of firing through the intervals, and were constantly in motion. The shells from the bombs were admirably well thrown by the Royal Marine Artillery, and, though directly. across or over us, not an accident, that I know of, occurred to any ship. The whole was conducted in perfect silence, and such a thing as a cheer I never heard in any part of the line 1 and, that the guns were well worked and directed, will be seen for many years to come, and remembered by these barbarians for ever.”
At ten o’clock the state of Algiers was this: the upper batteries on the Mole were pounded into ruins, the lower batteries nearly silenced, some ten thousand houses destroyed within the city, and about six thousand Moors slain. The storehouses,. arsenals, and ships were in flames—a tremendous sight—and the burning frigate was drifting about the bay and menacing the English ships. Seeing that his work was accomplished, Lord Exmouth cut the Queen Charlotte's cables and springs, signalled to the fleet to move away from the line of fire, and stood out before the light land breeze. The other ships followed, though more slowly, and before 2 a.m. every British and Dutch ship had come out of reach of shot or shells, and was picking her anchorage, being greatly assisted in this by the blaze that lit up the whole bay. AS soon as they had finished, the sky carried on the uproar; for nearly three hours the lightning and thunder were incessant and the rain came down in sheets. At one in the morning, the old Dutch Admiral came on board to offer Lord Exmouth his congratulation. “I am quite happy to die, my lord,” he said, “ now that we have got satisfaction from those pirates.” Early in the morning, before the fight, Lord Exmouth had ordered that supper should be ready at this hour; and now he sat down with his officers and proposed the health of every brave man in the fleet. His own was afterwards drunk with acclamation, and then the company went off to sleep—the sleep of the thoroughly weary.
The British lost in this engagement 128 men and boys lulled, 690 wounded; the Dutch, 13 killed and 52 wounded. In all about 118 tons of powder had been burnt, and 500 tons of shot sent into the pirates’ city. The extent of the Algerine losses will never be known. Some accounts place it at 4,000, others at almost 7,000 men. Whatever the total, it would have been much
Digitized by
Google
"LORD EXMOUTH . . . KEPT RUNNING ABOUT THE DECK” (p. 271).
18
Digitized by
Google
274
THE STOHY OF THE SEA.

greater had not the Dey opened the city gates during the bombardment and let the non-combatants flee into the open country. The wounded died in great numbers for lack of surgeons. As long as tho English remained, the Dey forbade the customary howling Mohammedan funerals; but there were known to be three large houses piled with dead, and the digging of graves went on every night for a week.
•’BounmuJi
XWOyro FmaAVtl
PLAN OF BOMBARDMENT OF ALGIERS.
As soon as daylight came, the Admiral dispatched Lieutenant Burgess and Salame to the Dey with a flag of truce and the following letter:—
" Sir,—For your atrocities at Bona on defenceless Christians, your unbecoming disregard to the demands 1 made yesterday in the name of the Prince Regent of England, the fleet under my command has given you a signal chastisement by the total destruction of your navy, storehouses, and arsenal, with half your batteries.
“ As England does not war for the destruction of cities, I am unwilling to visit your personal cruelties upon the inoffensive inhabitants of the country, and I therefore offer you the same terms of peace which I conveyed to you yesterday in my sovereign’s name. Without the acceptance of these terms, you can have no peace with England. If you receive this offer as you ought, you will fire three guns ; and I shall consider your not giving the signal as a refusal, and shall renew my operations at my own convenience. I offer you the above terms, provided neither the British consul nor the officers and men so wickedly seized by you from the boats of a British ship of war have met with any cruel treatment, or any of the Christian slaves in your power ; and I repeat my demand that the consul and officers and men may be sent off to me, conformable to ancient treaties.—I am, &u.	Exmouth.
“To his Highness, the Dey of Algiers.
“Vmen Charlotte, Algiers Bay, Aug. 28, 1816.”
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE DEY IS CONVINCED. 275
On reaching the Mole, Lieutenant Burgess and his men could not even distinguish the site of the batteries. All but four or live guns were dismantled or buried in rubbish. The bay was strewn with smoking hulks, and the water near the shore thick with dead bodies and charred timbers. On their way from the Mole to the city, Salame observed that the aqueduct was destroyed, that nearly every house in the town had been struck, and an incredible number levelled with the ground, their debris choking the narrow streets. In the Courtyard of the Palace were piled two great heaps of shot and corpses.
They found the Dey himself in a gallery on the third floor, looking over the sea. He was seated on a high sofa, with his bare legs crossed, and alternately gazed at his red slippers and puffed at a long cherry-stem med pipe. The folds of his turban and trousers were full of gunpowder, and his face and beard thickly begrimed with smoke. The monarch, indeed, with all his faults, was a brave warrior, as became an ex-Aga of Janissaries, and had been in the lighthouse battery (where his red, white, and yellow flag was hoisted) during the whole of the engagement. Just now he was in his least amiable mood; as. was natural, perhaps. He spoke roughly to the English, invited nobody to-sit down, and contented himself with asking what they wanted. Captain Brisbane, who had joined the party and acted as spokesman, treated his Majesty's ill-humour with as little concern as Admiral Keppel once treated the tantrums of a former monarch of Algiers, Keppel was commanding a squadron in the Mediterranean, when a couple of richly-laden vessels were seized and carried off by the Algerine pirates. Orders reached him from home to sail into the harbour of Algiers and demand restitution of the Dey; in case of refusal, he could make any reprisals he ehose. Keppel anchored his squadron in tho bay, facing the Dey’s palace, and went on shore, attended only by his captain and barge’s crew. Proceeding straight to the palace, he laid open his embassy and demanded satisfaction in the name of His Britannic Majesty. “ I wonder," said the Dey, “ at His Britannic Majesty’s insolence in sending me a beardless boy." Keppel replied, “ Had His Britannic Majesty supposed that wisdom could be measured by the length of a beard, he would have sent your Deyship a he-goat.” At this prompt reply the Dey leaped up from his seat in a rage, and ordered his mutes to bring his bow-string, at the same time telling Keppel that he should pay for his impudence with hts life. Quite unmoved, the Admiral pointed out of the window at the British ships riding in the bay, and answered, “If it be your pleasure to put me to death, my men yonder will see that there is a pretty blaze for my funeral pile.” The Dey had. wisdom enough to take the hint: Keppel returned unbanned, and ample restitution was made.
Captain Brisbane had no such difficult task. He quietly pressed his demands. The three hundred and eighty-two thousand five hundred dollars were to be repaid to Sicily and Sardinia at once. The slaves tlren in Algiers were to be put on board next day, and tho slaves from Oran, Bona, and
Digitized byTooele
276
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
Constantia as soon as they should arrive. “ Some of them owe money in Algiers,” objected the Dey. “ Pray, who is to pay their debts ? ” Captain Brisbane refused to go into this. Thirty thousand dollars were next demanded as
compensation to the British Consul for the destruction of his house and furniture, and a public apology for the detention of his person, in terms there and then dictated. For a long time Omar Pasha declined to eat this particular leek. “He looked at me with such angry eyes,” writes Sal am 6, “ that, if it had been in his power, I am sure he would have cut me to pieces.” But, while the Dey
Digitized by
Google
AND APOLOGISES.
277
sat pulling his beard and glaring, the captain of the port, who from the beginning had been for peace, came up behind his sofa and whispered—
“ My lord, it cannot be helped; you must submit That yellow-haired man (the Consul) must now triumph.”
Very sulkily the Dey repeated the apology in Arabic, and Mr. McDonell
“ THEY WAVED THEIR HATS AND CAPS, AND SHOUTED ” (p 278).
accepted it. As a sample of this monarch’s temper, it may be mentioned that, as Aga of the Janissaries, he had roasted the children of the Bey of Oran, and had compelled their father (whom he afterwards scalped and flayed) to eat their flesh. His predecessor, an amiable gentleman who had a habit of murdering his wives and salting them down in jars, was suffocated in his bath by a slave. Omar himself was pitched out of window soon after Lord Exmouth sailed. His two successors lived one year each.
Digitized by Tooele
278
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
The day after the conference one thousand and eighty-three liberated slaves (Italians, Sicilians, Dutchmen, Spaniards, Greeks) were received on board the English ships. As they came off, their joy made them behave like madmen. They leaped into the boats almost before they could be counted; they cursed the Algerines; they waved their hats and caps, and shouted, “ Viva the King of England! Viva the Eternal Father! Viva the Admiral of England who lias freed us from the second hell!” Some of these poor wretches had been thirty-five years in slavery. Their chains, which were never removed, were one hundred pounds weight for a strong man, sixty pounds for an old man, and thirty pounds for a boy. In most cases the irons had eaten deep furrows into their ankles and waists. As the boats conveying them began to push oft', the Moors, mad with rage at their loss, rushed down to the Mole and fired several shots at our sailors. Lord Exmouth ‘ promptly sent word to the Dey that if this kind of nonsense continued, he would bombard the town again.
The ransom-money and the Consul’s damages were brought down to the shore in four hundred sacks, carried by Jews and Moors, the Dey having declined to admit four hundred unbelieving British sailors into the palace. The Dey's treasury was a cistern in an old castle, where millions of stolen money' had Iain and accumulated for hundreds of years. A great part of it was green with rust.
For the skill and valour he had displayed in this achievement, Lord Exmouth was created a Viscount by George III., and received the thanks of Parliament. He had already7 obtained a peerage and £2,000 for his services on the east coast of Spain. In 1817 he was appointed to the naval command at Plymouth. In 1826 he retired from active service, and passed the close of his life near Teignmouth, where, on the 23rd of January, 1833, in the seventysixth year of his age, this fine old commander went calmly to his rest. A brother-officer who was with him in his last hours said, " I have seen him great in battle, but never so great as on his death-bed.” His humanity7 in warning the Moors off the battlements before the Queen Charlotte opened fire was of a piece with the courage by which he was led, twenty years before, to save single-handed the lives of between five hundred and six hundred of his fellow-creatures. On the 26th of January, 1796, Captain Edward Pellew happened to be in Plymouth. He was in evening dress, and on his way to a dinner-party7, when he heard that a large ship, the Dutton, East Indiaman, had gone on the rocks under the citadel, and that no one was able to go to her assistance. The Dutton had only arrived in the Sound a few hours, when a furious gale came on from the south-west and broke her rudder off upon the rocks of Mount Batten. She then became unmanageable: drove ashore, under the citadel; and, after violently beating on the strand for several hours, broke her back and became a mere wreck, with a helpless crowd upon her deck of seamen, soldiers, women, and children. It was at this juncture that Pellew contrived to get a line between the ship and the shore;
Digitized by Goode
THE BOMBARDMENT OF .ALEXANDRIA. 279
when, stripping off his evening clothes, he plunged into the breakers, and, half by swimming, half by hauling at the rope, reached the deck of the Dutton. There, by his cool air of authority, he at once stopped the panic, promising that he would be the last man to leave the ship. Ropes were at once conveyed to the shore, and boats run along them, with such success that, from the time Pellew set foot on the deck, not a single life was lost
A more recent bombardment in which British ships were engaged was that of Alexandria, on July 11th, 1882. Lord Exmouth in 1816 anchored his Queen Charlotte within fifty yards of the Algerine batteries. In this case the range was slightly different. Our ironclads—the Invincible (flagship), Alexandra, Sultan, Superb, Inflexible, Temeraire, Penelope, and Monarch —blazed into the Alexandrine forts at distances of 1,000 to 3,700 yards; yet within eleven hours they had demolished or silenced every battery and blown up a number of magazines, with great loss of life on the Egyptian side and scarcely any on ours. The story of the bombardment, apart from its political causes and consequences is brief enough. Early on Monday, July 10th, Admiral Sir Beau cl lamp Seymour, commander-in-chief of the Mediterranean Fleet, sent a letter to the Governor of Alexandria, demanding a surrender of the forts at the month of the harbour, since he had discovered that their construction was still being proceeded with, in spite of the solemn denials of the authorities. Failing to obtain a satisfactory answer, on Tuesday morning, at seven o’clock, he opened fire. By half-past five that evening—although to begin with the wind and sun were in the enemy’s favour, and the smoke hid the forts and shore from view—there was not an Egyptian gun but had ceased speaking. When the smoke grew thick, the Admiral sent a Mr. Hardy, a midshipman, to the maintop to signal the results of our firing and note the successful hits. At one o’clock, volunteers were cal led for to go ashore and spike the guns in Fort Meks, a service likely to prove dangerous. There were plenty of volunteers, however; of whom twelve, under the command of Lieutenant Bradford, were picked for the work; two other officers accompanying them. To get ashore they had to swim through tho surf; and, while effecting a landing thus, they might easily have been overpowered by the natives. These, however, offered no opposition, and our brave men burst the Egyptian cannons with charges of gun-cotton. The plucky little gunboat, Condor, commanded by Lord Charles Beresford, ran in under the guns of the Marabout Fort, and with her two small 64-pounders and one 7-inch Woolwich rifled gun, managed to silence three of the enemy’s cannon, a single shot from either of which would have sunk her. The Admiral acknowledged this daring feat by signalling, “Well done, Condor!" On his return to England Sir Beauchamp Seymour was raised to the peerage, with the title of Baron Alcester.
From bombardments we turn to blockades. We have already seen how
Digitized by GOOQle
280
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
Hawke kept watch upon Brest, and how Nelson shut up M. Latouche Tr4ville within the harbour of Toulon. These were purely military blockades, a watch, on the French ships of war to prevent their coining out without fighting for it But in the year 1807 we come upon a blockade of a different kind—a commercial blockade to prevent merchant ships getting in. It was the English answer to Napoleon’s famous Berlin Decree, which virtually forbade every country under Napoleon’s rule or influence to trade with England. England's reply amounted to this—No country which refuses to trade with England shall trade with any other. And as, at that time, all Continental Europe lay more or less under Napoleon’s hand, the coast-line of Continental Europe was blockaded by the English. Such a gigantic effort had never been made before. Nor could it have been made in 1807 but for the ruin wrought upon the French and Spanish fleets by Nelson at Trafalgar, two years before—another proof for us of what the command of the sea can effect.
The stagnation of manufactures caused terrible distress in England. On
TUB BOMBARDMENT OF ALEXANDRIA (p. 279).
the Continent the distress was still greater. But the difference of prices between, say, London and Paris was considerable enough to induce smuggling on a very large scale, and sometimes of a very curious character. Sugar, coffee, spices and such like wares, packed in small kegs or boxes, used to find their way into Germany, and even France, overland, on
Digitized by
Google
BLOCKADES.
281
pack-horses, from the Gulf of Salonica. When the selling price offered a gross gain of 1,000 or 1,500 per cent, there was margin enough for big expenses and risks. A favourite, but very unpatriotic, plan was for an English
PORTS OP ALEXANDRIA,
merchant ship with a carefully selected cargo to arrange to meet a French privateer at a convenient spot, and be taken prisoner. She was then towed into a French port, where the governor, unwilling to damp the ardour of the brave sons of France, allowed the cargo to be sold for the benefit of the captors—and the captives—and himself. It was known even to Napoleon that several of his generals and marshals made very large fortunes in this and similar ways. Still, the smuggled goods were but a drop in the vast sea of European needs. The discontent grew louder and louder. It was most formidable in Russia; her exports, such as hemp, tar, and tallow, not lending themselves to the devices of the smuggler: and where there was no export, there was no money for import. When the Russian misery grew beyond endurance, the Czar gave way. The blockade was raised. Napoleon’s pet scheme broke into pieces, and in his wrath with Russia he plunged with his Grand Anny into that disastrous march upon Moscow' which was his ruin and began the downfall of his empire.
No other such struggle is known in history. The nearest approach to it was waged between the Northern and Southern American States during the War of Secession. But there the blockade was only from outside. In any Southern port a merchant ship judiciously laden was sure of a friendly welcome and a very profitable market. The difficulty was to get in; and this difficulty was made very great by the enormous preponderance of the North in sea power. And there, too, of course, the large profits to be realised by a successful venture gave rise to a singular development of smuggling, under the name of blockade-running; and it is said that in England many large fortunes were thus made during the struggle between the States. One of the most daring and fortunate of these adventurers was Captain Hobart of the Royal Navy,
Digitized by LnOOQle
282
THE STORY OF THE SEA,
HO BAHT PASHA.
afterwards well known as Hobart Pasha, In the early days of blockade-running, he took his ship several times in and out of Wilmington with a skill and daring which not only deserved, but commanded, success; and when the war was over he published an account of his adventures. From his “ Sketches from My Life,” we are enabled, by the courtesy of his publishers, to quote the following account of one of his most thrilling experiences:—
“ Our cargo was landed, and preparations made for taking on board the paying article in this trade, namely, cotton.
“I never bought it in any quantity, but I know that, the price in the Southern States averaged from twopence to threepence a pound, the price in Liverpool at that time being about half-a-crown.
“ We were anxious to try the luck of our run-out before the moon got powerful, so the cargo was shipped as quickly as possible. In the first place, the hold was stored by expert stevedores, the cotton-bales being so closely-packed that a mouse could hardly find room to hide itself among them. The hatches were put on, and a tier of bales put fore and aft in every available
spot on the deck, leaving openings for the approaches to the cabins, engineroom, and the men’s forecastle; then another somewhat thinner tier on the top of that, after which a few bales for the captain and officers, those uncontrollable rascals whom the poor agents could not manage, and the cargo was complete. Loaded in this way, the vessel with only her foremast up, with her bow-funnel, and grey-painted sides, looked more like a huge bale of cotton with a stick placed upright at one end of it, than anything else I can think of. One bale for ------ and still one more for ----(I never tell tales out of school)
and all was ready.
“ We left the quay at Wilmington cheered by the hurrahs of our brother blockade-runners, who were taking in and discharging their cargoes, and steamed a short distance down the river, when we were boarded to be searched and smoked. This latter extraordinary proceeding, called for perhaps by the existing state of affairs, took me altogether aback. That a smoking apparatus should be applied to a cargo of cotton seemed almost astounding. But so it was ordered, the object being to search for runaways, and, strange to say, its efficacy was apparent, when,' after an hour or more’s application of the process (which was by no means a gentle one), an unfortunate wretch, crushed almost
Digitized by
Google
. A FAMOUS BLOCKADE-RUNNER. 283
to death by the closeness of his hiding-place, poked with a long stick till his ribs must have been like touchwood, and smoked the colour of a backwood Indian, was dragged by the heels into the daylight, ignominiously put into irons, and hurled into the guard-boat. This discovery nearly caused the detention of the vessel on suspicion of our being the accomplices of the runaway ; but after some deliberation, we were allowed to go on.
“ Having steamed down the river a distance of about twenty miles, we anchored at two o’clock in the afternoon near its mouth. We were hidden by Fort Fisher from the blockading squadron lying oft* the bar, there to remain till some time after nightfall. After anchoring we went on shore to take a peep at the enemy from the batteries. Its commandant, a fine, dashing young Confederate officer, who was a firm friend to blockade-runners, accompanied us round the fort. Wc counted twenty-five vessels under weigh; some of them occasionally ventured within range; but no sooner had one of them done so, than a shot was thrown so unpleasantly near that she at once moved out again.
"We were much struck with the weakness of Fort Fisher, which, with a garrison of twelve hundred men, and only half-finished, could have been easily taken at any time since the war begun by a resolute body of five thousand men making a night attack. It is true that at the time of its capture it was somewhat stronger than at. the time I visited it, but even then its garrison was comparatively small, and its defences unfinished. I fancy the bold front so long shown by its occupiers had much to do with the fact that such an attack was not attempted till just before the close of the war. The time chosen for our starting was eleven o'clock, at which hour the tide was at its highest on the bar at the entrance of the river. Fortunately the moon set about ten, and, as it was very cloudy, wo had every reason to expect a pitch-dark night. There were two or three causes that made one rather nervous on this occasion..
“ In the first place, five minutes after we had crossed the bar, we should be in the thick of the blockaders, who always closed nearer in on the very dark nights. Secondly, our cargo of cotton was of more importance than the goods we had carried in; and thirdly, it w« the thiny to do to make the double trip in and out safely. There were also all manner of reports of the new plans that had been arranged by a zealous commodore lately sent from New York to catch us all However, it was of no use canvassing these questions, so at a quarter to eleven we weighed anchor and steamed down to the entrance of the river.
“ Very faint lights, which could not be seen far at sea, were set on the beach in the same position as I have before described, having been thus placed for a vessel coming in: and bringing these astern in an exact line, that is, the two into one, we knew that we were in the passage for going over the bar. The order was then given, 'Full speed ahead,’ and we shot at a great speed
out to sea.
Digitized by LnOOQle
284
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
“ Our troubles began almost immediately; for the cruisers had placed a rowing barge, which could not be seen by the forts, close to the entrance, to signalise the direction which any vessel that came out might take. This was done by rockets being thrown up by a designed plan from the barge. We had hardly cleared the bar when we saw this boat very near our bows, nicely placed to be run clean over, and as we were going about fourteen knots.
“DBAUOED BY THE HEELS INTO THE DAYLIGHT” (p. ^D.
her chance of escape would have been small had we been inclined to finish her. Changing the helm, which I did myself, a couple of spokes just look us clear. We passed so close that 1 could have dropped a biscuit into the boat with ease. I heard the crash of broken oars against our sides; not a word was spoken.
“ I strongly suspect every man in that boat held his breath till the great white avalanche of cotton, rushing by so unpleasantly near, had passed quite clear of her.
Digitized byItOOQIC
RUNNING OUT OF WILMINGTON.
285
“However, they seemed very soon to have recovered themselves, for a minute had scarcely passed before up went a rocket, which I thought a very ungrateful proceeding on their part. But they only did their duty, and perhaps they did not know how nearly they had escaped being made food for fishes. On the rocket being thrown up, a gun was tired uncommonly close to us, but,
NASSAU HAHBOUH, BAHAMAS.
as we did not hear any shot, it may have been only a signal to the cruisers to keep a sharp look-out.
“ We steered a mile or two near the coast, always edging a little to the eastward, and then shaped our course straight out to sea. Several guns were tired in the pitch-darkness very near us. (I am not quite sure whether some of the blockaders did not occasionally pepper each other.) After an hour’s fast steaming, we felt moderately safe, and by the morning had a good offing.
“ Daylight broke with thick, hazy weather, nothing being in sight. We "ent on all right till half-past eight o’clock, when the weather cleared up, and
Digitized by
Google
286
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
there was a large paddle-wheel cruiser (that we must have passed very near to in the thick weather) about six miles astern of us. The moment she saw us she gave chase. After running for a quarter of an hour, it was evident that, with our heavy cargo on board, the cruiser had the legs of us, and, os there was a long day before us for the chase, things looked badly. We moved some
cotton aft to immerse decreasing her distance favoiired us for a time.
“ It is mentioned in
our screws well ; but still the cruiser was steadily from us, when an incident of a very curious nature
the book of sailing directions that the course of the
Gulf Stream (in the vicinity of which we knew we were) is in calm weather and smooth water plainly marked out by a ripple on its inner and outer edges. We clearly saw, about a mile ahead of us, a remarkable ripple, which wo rightly, as it turned out, conjectured was that referred to in the book. As soon as we had crossed it, we steered the usual course of the current of the Gulf Stream, that here ran from two to three miles an hour. Seeing us alter our course, the cruiser did the same; but she had not crossed the ripple on the edge of the stream, and the course she was now steering tended to keep her for some time from doing so. The result soon made it evident that the observations in the book were correct; for until she too crossed the ripple into the stream, we dropped her rapidly astern, whereby we increased our distance to at least seven miles.
“ It was now noon, from which time the enemy again began to close with us, and at five o'clock was not more than three miles distant At six o'clock she opened a harmless fire with the Parrot gun in her bow, the shot falling far short of us. The sun set at a quarter to seven; by which time she had got so near that she managed to send two or three shots over us, and was steadily coming up.
“Luckily, as night came on, the weather became very cloudy, and we were on the dark side of the moon, now setting in the west, which, occasionally breaking through the clouds astern of the cruiser, showed us all her movements, while we must have been very difficult to make out, though certainly not more than a mile off. All this time she kept firing away, thinking, I suppose, that she would frighten us into stopping. If wo had gone straight on, we should doubtless have been caught: so we altered our course two points to the eastward. After steaming a short distance we stopped quite still, blowing off steam under water, not a spark or die slightest smoke showing from the funnel; and we had the indescribable satisfaction of seeing our enemy steam past us, still firing ahead at some imaginary vessel.
“ This had been a most exciting chase and a very narrow escape; night only saved us from a New York prison. All this hard running had made an awful hole in our coal-bunkers, and, as it was necessary to keep a stock for a run off tho blockaded Bahama Islands, we were obliged to reduce our expenditure to as small a quantity as possible. However, we were well out to sea, and after
Digitized by Google
A VERY NARROW ESCAPE.
287
having passed the line of cruisers between Wilmington and Bermuda, we had not much to fear.” *
But besides this blockade-running in and out of the Atlantic ports, which was carried on in specially-built, fast steamers, there was a good deal also’ in and out of the ports on the Gulf of Mexico, which was carried on in small sailing vessels, often of a primitive type, which by desperate skill and ingenuity managed to make the passage to or from Havana, and often to escape or outwit the Federal cruisers. An old Scotch skipper, David McLusky, who had settled down at Galveston, is described as having specially distinguished himself in this sendee; and on one occasion, sailing from Havana in a crazy old craft built on the lines of a Thames barge, he not only took her and her cargo safely into the Brazos River, but, having been captured on the way, he recaptured his vessel, and took the prize crew, consisting of a lieutenant and six men, in as prisoners of war. This same McLusky, on another occasion, in a somewhat better vessel, was again captured and taken in tow by a Federal cruiser, who put two men on board as a watch, and afterwards anchored for the night off the mouth of the same Brazos River. It was Christmas evening, and McLusky, commiserating with his guard on their hard fortune in not being allowed to have a jollification with their messmates, asked them down to the cabin to have a glass of grog, and presently took the opportunity to leave them alone with a bottle of brandy. When he came back, the bottle was empty and the men were on the floor. Then, in a blinding rain squall, McLusky cast off the tow-rope, and made his way into the river. In the morning, the men having slept off their drink, prepared to go on deck, and show themselves. “It must have calmed down/’ said McLusky. “ Dead calm,” said one of the men, as they went up the ladder. Suddenly, with an oath, he fell back. “ What’s the matter?” said McLusky. “Matter?” cried the man: “we've got into Hades, or some other sea-port.” They better understood where they had got to when a corporal’s guard came on board and inarched them off as prisoners, but a few days later they were released as having been captured by a neutral merchant-ship.
■ An adventure, even more exciting, occurred in a run made by a Captain W illiam W atson with the Rob Roy schooner from the mouth of the Brazos River. Captain Watson, in addition to his cargo, carried important dispatches from Major-General Magruder, of the Confederate Army, to the Confederate States Consul at Havana. These he wrapped securely in a piece of canvas, and tied to a piece of chain sufficient to sink them to the bottom of the sea if necessary; and all he waited for was the dark night and a favourable "wind. The sequel is told in his “Adventures of a Blockade-Runner.”
“It was now getting near the new moon; the nights were dark, but the
• From “Sketches from My Life.” by the kte Hobart Paehl.' London: Longmans, Green 4 Co,, 1880.
Digitized by LnOOQle
288
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
•weather continued calm; there was scarcely a breath of wind, and we were anxiously waiting for a norther. The other two vessels had come down the river and lay near us, The gunboats off the mouth of the river continued firing at intervals, and their shot often went up the country far beyond us, but it seemed to be wide of any mark, and fell with a heavy thud in the prairie. We did not know what they were firing at, and the forts took no notice, and did not reply.
“At last the expected norther came. It came suddenly and with great fury about five in the afternoon. The pilot, however, would not take us out that night; he said this was too violent, and might only be a squall. The following day the wind fell very much, and almost died away, but towards evening it freshened up again. The pilot said this was not a steady norther, and could not be depended upon. He said, however, that it would very likely blow hard all night, and give us a good offing before daylight if we could only carry the muslin.
“ I determined to go; so did the other two schooners. One of these, the Mary Elizabeth, Captain Shaeffer, was smaller than the Rob Roy; the other— the Hind, I think, was her name—was larger. It was proposed that we should start as soon as the gunboats were hidden by the darkness, and have eleven hours of darkness before us; and, if we could make ten knots an hour, we would be 110 miles from the coast by daylight. The pilot said we must go out under low canvas, so that gainst the darkness of the land we would not be so readily seen from the cruisers or any of their boats until we got out past them; after that, we must use our own judgment, and scud on as fast as we could.
“ Everything was got ready; double reefs were put in the main and fore sails, and everything secure for a heavy strain, and the binnacle-light muffled. The pilot came on board of the Rob Roy, directing the other two vessels to follow close in her wake.
“ As soon as the cruisers were fairly hid by the darkness, sail was made, and the vessels stood down the river—the Rob Roy first, followed by the Mary Elizabeth, and the Hind third. The wind being off the shore, the water was smooth on the bar. The pilot, with his small boat, did not wish to go far out to sea, knowing the labour of a long pull back against such a strong wind; and as soon as the water deepened he jumped into his boat, saying, ‘You are all clear now; go ahead, and remember that the British Lion’s good wishes are with you ! ’
“The Mary Elizabeth was close up with the Rob Roy, almost passing her, but the Hind was some distance astern. I never saw more of the Hind, and I believe she was captured.
“ As soon as we were well clear of the bar, I stood along the coast to the westward, keeping in about two fathoms of water for about three miles, and then stood out to sea and set about getting the reefs out. The course steered
Digitized by^OOQlC
" UP WENT A ROCKET" (p. M3X
Digitized by Google
290 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
was S.S.E., the object being to go square off' from the coast As we got more oft’ the land, the wind increased, and the vessel went through the water at a great rate. The men were quite exhilarated; they declared she was making twelve knots. I considered that impossible for a vessel of her size, but I had no log to try. The men got more excited, and wished to set the main-topmast staysail As we were now far outside of the cruisers, and there was no danger of being seen from them, I told them to send it up. When it was set, she bounded on still faster, and there seemed every chance of being well out to sea before daylight.
“We now set the watches. I appointed George to act as mate, and he would take Polly, the Chilian boy, with him on the one watch, and I would take Hagan with me on the other watch, taking turn at the wheel myself. George was a Scotchman, whose age it would be hard to determine; he might be between forty and fifty. He was partly a wreck, as he was like too many others of his profession, who considered, it their duty, when they got paid off after a voyage, to spend all their money in drink. He was, however, when at sea, an excellent man, and understood his business well. He was full of old. sea proverbs and sailors’ superstitions, and actually believed in many of them. On this trip he discovered, when the vessel put to sea, she had a slight list to port, which he declared indicated a short and lucky passage, and he firmly believed it would be so. He insisted on the usual ceremony of drawing lots for tho choice of watches, and when tho lot fell to the starboard watch, which was his, he said this was another lucky omen, and he must follow the rules and choose the first watch.
“I went below, but not to sleep. The howling of the gale, the rushing of the vessel through the water, and tho heaving of the vessel as she got further from the land and into rougher water, assured me that we were fast increasing our distance from the blockaded ports and from the scenes of all my troubles, and was a pleasant sensation to me. The idea of a small vessel, drawing about four and a half feet of water, carrying a deckload over five feet high, which weighed more than all the cargo in her hold, going to sea in a violent gale, short-handed and handled by men possessing few of the qualifications required by marine regulations, and driven along in the most reckless manner, might seem little short of madness. Yet I can safely say that hundreds of vessels—many of them smaller, less sc a worthy, and more overloaded than was the Rob Roy at this time—left the Texas ports in the midst of heavy gales during this war, and, strange as it may appear, with the exception of one case, which I will hereafter mention, I never knew of one of them being lost at sea
“ In this kind of blockade-running, that is, by sailing vessels, by far the most pleasant and exciting time was the night of coming out from the blockaded port. .
" In running in it was both difficult and dangerous, especially in a sailing
Digitized by Goode
THE SCHOONER ROB ROY.
291
vessel. You approached the coast; you did not know where the cruisers might be stationed; you could not choose your weather, and you could not make your landfall exactly at the time you wished. If you lay in the offing till night, you were in great danger of being captured; and even if you knew your exact position, you had afterwards to make in the night a distance of fifteen or twenty miles, and shape your course so as to strike exactly some narrow intricate channel, surrounded and guarded by the blockading fleet You were subject to baffling winds, calms, currents, or tides; the danger increased as the entrance was approached, and the slightest error might prove fatal
"On the outward trip it was much easier. You could, before leaving, mark well the position of the blockading fleet, choose your time, wait for a dark night and a favourable wind, set your course to pass the blockading fleet, and when past crowd sail, and you were getting further and further away from danger. ■
" When I went below, I found my two supercargoes trying to be happy. They said they were not going to sleep; they were going to help us to get well away from the Yankee cruisers before daylight. They said they were sure from the rate we were going that we must be near a hundred miles from the coast by this time; did I not think so ? The vessel was heaving a little, but they were not sea-sick. Oh no, they never felt better in their life, so they said.
“ I had not been long down when I heard something crack, and I quickly went on deck. It was the strop round the topmast which held the topmast staysail which had parted, and the sail was fluttering in the wind.
“I took the wheel, and told George to get it taken in. This was soon done. I said never to mind to set it again; we had plenty’ of sail upon her. I only said this because I did not wish to bid any of them go up to the topmast-head in such a wind. They entreated me to let it be set again, Mid Polly said he would soon go up. He took a new strop and went up, and soon had the strop fastened, the block hooked on and moused, and the sail was set again.
" It was now midnight. We tried the pumps, and found the vessel was making some water, but not a great deal. I then took the middle watch. The J^lo still continued, and the sea was getting much higher as we increased our distance from land.
“ After the first two hours I went to relieve Hagan at the wheel. He looked a little uncertain at me and hesitated, then said he had heard that I was good ^ figures, and a good smart navigator, but it was a very ticklish thing to steer a f'*re-an(l-aft vessel with such a heavy mainsail before the wind in such a ^^d and sex I said to let me try it; I would take care she would not broach ^^ He reluctantly gave me the wheel, warning me that she was taking a good deal of weather helm. He kept standing l>y my side for some time: at last he
Digitized by AnOOQle
292
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
seemed satisfied, and said, ‘ Who says you are a shore-going man ? ’ I then ordered him to try the pumps, which he did, and reported the vessel still making a little water. At the end of the middle watch I told George to pay particular attention to the pumps. I then turned in, telling George to call me as soon as daylight was setting in.
"At daylight I went on deck. The wind had gone down considerably. I
told Polly, as he appeared to be fond of going aloft, to go to the mast-head and see if there was anything in sight. He reported a sail on the horizon to the north-east, which looked like a schooner,
*' Fearing it might be the Kittytinnir, I ordered the topmast staysail to be hauled down to make us less easy to be observed, and, taking my binocular, I went to the mast-head, where I soon satisfied myself that it was not the Kittytinnic, but a much smaller vessel, apparently the Mary Elizabeth, which had sailed with us from Brazos River,
“ The staysail was set again; the wind was dying away, but there was still a heavy sea, and the vessel was slipping along very well.
“ On looking over the stern I could now and then see small flakes of the white lead and tallow which had been put on the vessel’s bottom. It was now
Digitized by
Google
A SAIL IN SIGHT.
293
washing off, and taking with it any grass or shells which might have adhered to it I knew this would leave her clean and in good sailing trim.
“On getting the latitude at noon, and working up the time, I found that we had made a run of about 130 miles, but we were not in a very good position.
“ I knew that the Federals having landed forces at Point Isabel, their warvessels would be often passing back and forward between that place and New Orleans, and they would be on the look-out for blockade-runners, and we were just about their track, and the wind seemed to be dying away. The norther, as the pilot had surmised, was not a lasting or steady one, and had spent itself
“About one p.m. it was dead-calm, and we lay helpless. We lowered every sail and lay under bare poles, so that we would not be so easily seen from a distance. This I afterwards found to be an excellent plan, as we would be less apt to be observed at a distance of seven miles than at a distance of twelve miles with soils up, and it was not long before this was made------------------------------------------------ plain.
“ About two p.m. a steamer
NEW ORLEANS.
was observed from the mast-head to the westward, steering to the eastward. She was evidently a cruiser or transport—in fact, there were none others in those waters at that time—and whether cruiser or transport, she would
Digitized by
Google
394
THE. STORY OF THE SEA.
make a prize of us if she observed us. She was yet about twelve miles distant; but, if she continued on her course, she would pass within four or five miles of us.
“ There was not a breath of wind, and the sea had calmed down. If we were only two miles further to the south, we believed she would pass without noticing us. Could we do anything?
" The two old sweeps which we had picked up on the Brazos River had been placed one on each side to reach from the main to the fore rigging, and lashed to the shrouds to form safety rails for the men walking on the deck load. No time was to be lost. They were cut clear and swung at the fore shrouds, and all hands, including the cook, bent on to them; while the two supercargoes, having got a little over their sea-sickness, were told that exercise would do them good, and they got each one of the oars of the boat and pulled abaft the deck load from the quarter rail. AU helped, and all worked with a will, each in turn getting a little change to breathe by taking the wheel.
“ The effect was greater than I expected, and the speed we made was astonishing; and I believe we pulled the schooner between two and three miles before the steamer was abreast of us, and she passed at a distance of fully seven miles without observing us.	■
" Seeing we were in a dangerous place—right in the track of the cruisers— we longed for a breeze.
" George kept whistling and calling upon the other men to whistle. He said it was certain to bring a breeze. I laughed and said, ‘ Yes, if you whistle long enough, you will get wind, no doubt.’ But he maintained that whistling would bring wind, for he had seen it happen many a time, and he continued to whistle with all his might.
“Towards evening the sky had a sort of marbled appearance, and a few light streaks of reddish clouds were to be seen.
“'See!’ cried George; ‘did I not tell you that whistling would bring wind?’ “ ‘ Where is the wind ? ’ said I.
“ ‘ See yon sky,’ said he:
‘“A mackerel sky, and long mare’s tales, Make lofty ships cany low sails.’
"About sunset a light breeze sprang up from the south-east, and we made sail and stood to the south-west, shaping tho course for Tampico.
" The breeze continued all night, but very light, and just before daylight it died away again, and every sail was lowered.
“ Tho vessel being fitted up throughout with patent blocks, and powerful peak purchases, the hoisting and handling of the sails was comparatively easy. .	“ All that day the wind was light’ and Ladling, and we made but little
progress. Wc kept a constant look-out from the mast-head, but nothing appeared in sight.
Digitized byVrOOQlC
A CRUISER IX PURSUIT.
295
''During the night it fell dead-calm, and before daylight broke all sail was taken down, and we lay under bare poles. This was fortunate, for when daylight broke a square-rigged vessel was observed lying becalmed to the northward. She bore about north by west, and seemed to be about eight or nine miles distant.
“ I thought it might be some vessel homeward bound from Matamoras, as we were now near to their track, but George was sure she was a man-of-war, and one of the sailing vessels which cruised in the Gulf further out from the land.
“ In any case it was best to give her a wide berth, and the sweeps were got out and all hands laboured at them.
“ The morning was hot, and it was laborious work, and there were many applications to the water-cask. We were, however, increasing our distance from her considerably.
“About eight a.in. a light breeze sprang up from the south-east. This was unfortunate, as it was against us pulling, and if we made sail we would be observed.
“ As the men were getting fatigued, to encourage them I told them that if we could just hold our own against the wind for a short time without making sail, the breeze would soon reach the square-rigged vessel, and then if she had not seen us, and did not stand close hauled on the port tack to the southward, any other course she might take would soon take her out of sight. George, however, had served on board a man-of-war, and he was of opinion that, if she was a man-of-war, that would be the very course she would stand upon, and she would be down close upon us before we had time to make sail, whereas, if we made sail now we would have a good start to windward before the breeze would reach her.
“‘But then,’ said I, ‘what chance have we against a fast vessel of that size with ten hours of daylight before us ? ’
“‘You don’t know what chance we would have,’ said he, ‘with a light breeze and smooth water, and a good start to windward. She is no doubt a fast vessel or she would not be there, and by her size she must, no doubt, oversail us. But her bottom must be foul, and we are clean, and we can lay a point closer to the wind than she can, and if we look sharp we can get a good start before the wind reaches her.’
“‘Then lose not a moment,’ said I. ‘All hands, cook, and supercargoes to make sail quick.'
“ We soon had all sail set, and, the breeze freshing up a little, wo wore speeding along nicely before the breeze had reached the square-rigged vessel. It, however, soon reached her, and the alacrity with which she was speeding after us showed only too plainly what she was.
“ We stood first on the port tack to the southward; she followed ns on the same tack Seeing this, I changed tack and stood on the starboard tack to
Digitized by Gooq
296
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
the northward. She still kept on her port tack, and passed dead to leeward o£ us at a distance of about six miles.
“I saw she was barque-rigged, and from the accounts I had of sailing cruisers in the Gulf, I knew that there was one, a large barque, which had been a merchant-vessel, named John Anderson, which had been selected by the United States Government on account of her fast-sailing qualities, and fitted up as a ship of war, and sent to this station to look out for the blockade-
MAP OF BLOCKADED POETS, ETC.
running schooners in the Gulf, and from her appearance I had no doubt but this was the vessel.
" The vessels were now partly stern to stern, and the distance between then* widening. I hoped it might remain so, but it was not long before she changer* tack again, and stood after us on the starboard tack.
“Seeing this, I again changed tack and stood to the southward.
“ ‘ That is the way you will do her,’ cried George. ' Keep going about, and, if she follows us, she must do the same. We can go about without losing an inch of ground, whilst she cannot go round without ■ making stern board, and before she gathers headway again we will gain a good piece on her.
“ I saw the force of this, and began to work in the wind's eye by short tacks. She continued to follow us for a short time, but, seeing we gained by it, she perceived our drift and made longer tacks, though by doing this she ran the chance of losing if the wind veered against her.
“We strained every nerve, and watched every chance, to gain any advantage; everything was made taut, and water dashed upon the sails. One of the
Digitized by
Google
A HOT CHASE.
297
supercargoes suggested the throwing over of part ot the deck load, but this was ridiculed, as it would have done more harm than good. This might appear strange to some, but to anyone acquainted with the working of flat shallow vessels at sea, it is well known that a deck load, particularly of light material, such as cotton, is of great advantage. It causes them to roll easier, and
“I COCLD PLAINLY MAKE OVT W;TH THE GLASS ” (p. 298>
saves jerking and chafing aloft, and in light winds they sail steadily, and are less apt to shake the wind out of their sails, and when cotton-loaded the increased draught gave them a better hold on the water, and they made better weather.
“ The barque was evidently gaining upon us, but still I thought that if we could only keep out of the range of her guns until night, we might escape her in the darkness.
"About one p.m. she passed us dead to leeward, about four miles distant, standing on a tack to the northward, as we stood on the opposite tack to the
Digitized by
Google
298
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
southward. The wind was now going down a little, and very soon after she put about and followed us on our tack to the southward.
• “It was evident that they expected the wind would soon die away, and they wished to keep near to us, so that they might have recourse to their boats if it fell calm.
“ To baffle them in this we again changed tack and stood to the northward, to widen the distance between us, or compel her to tack again, by which they would lose considerable ground.
“Our conjecture seemed to have been correct, for they again changed tack and followed us.
“ George, who had been watching the barque closely when she was going about, now cried out, ‘Did not I tell you that her bottom would be foul?’
“ ‘ How do you know ? ’ said I.
“ ‘ Because she is lazy in stays, and we will soon beat her at this game if the wind holds; ’ and he began to whistle with great earnestness.
“ As soon as we saw her fairly round, we again changed tack and stood to the southward.
“ It was plain that she was losing ground by going about so often, while we did not lose an inch, and the advantage we gained was perceptible, and, the wind still holding she did not put about again, but continued on her tack to the northward to make a longer board.
“ Fortunately for us she did this, as soon after it fell dead-calm, and both vessels lay helpless. It was only fortunate as having placed us farther apart, but still the wind dying away was most unfortunate for us. She lay about seven miles due north from us, and we knew she would send her boats.
“ We got out the sweeps and pulled with great vigour, to make the distance greater for the boats to come, in hopes that the breeze might spring up again before they reached us. There was, however, a slight sea against us, and we did not make great headway. •
“ I proposed to lower the sails, so that the boats might lose sight of us. This George protested against, saying there was no fear of the boats going off the track. Boats never left a man-of-war for a distance like that without a boat compass, and they would take our bearings before they left the ship. Besides, he was certain that this lull of the wind was too sudden to last long, and he began to whistle vehemently. .
“ In about half an hour I could plainly make out with the glass two boats pulling towards us, but I said nothing about this to the men, who still plied the sweeps vigorously, and the sea was going down a little, and they were making a little headway.
•_ “ The boats, however, were soon close up with ns, the first being within a mile. The men had seen the boats, and they said it was all up with us, and it was no use straining more at the oars. I had General Magruder's despatches all ready to consign to the deep. The first boat was within half a mile, when
Digitized by Goode
SAVED BY A PUFF OF WIND.
299
a slight curl was seen coming over the water. Every heart leaped. It was from S.S.E The vessel was kept away to let the light wind act on her sails and the men redoubled their vigour at the sweeps.
“ I could now see one of the boats within a quarter of a mile, and the men pulling with all their might to reach the schooner before the breeze caught her.
“It was an exciting moment. The twats were getting very near, but the breeze was beginning to act on the schooner. The sweeps were plied with desperation, George whistling as if he would burst his cheeks. The breeze gradually increased, and seemed to be setting on steady, and the schooner was again speeding along at a good pace.
“ The boats were almost within hail, and the men in them were pulling as if for dear life, but the schooner was now fast dropping them, and the breeze had every appearance of continuing.
“ The sweeps were taken in and lashed in their place. Everyone was jubilant, the two supercargoes got on to the cabin roof and began to taunt the men in the boats by waving their handkerchiefs and beckoning to them to come along.
“ I was telling them not to be too happy; we were still very far from being out of danger, and they did not know whose hands they might yet fall into, when they jumped down very quickly—not at what I said, but at the report of a rifle from the headmost boat, as a demand for us to heave to. Of course, we paid no attention, and it was soon followed by a general fire from both boats. We heard the bullets whistle, but none came alarmingly near.
“ As in duty bound, I told the men to keep down, and I would take the wheel myself, but George, who was at the wheel, refused to leave it, but asked the men to bring a bale of cotton and stick up behind him. Before, however, we could get a bale moved the schooner was far out of reach of shot from the boats, and the firing ceased. This, however, suggested to me the necessity for some protection for the man at the helm in the event of being chased by boats.
“ Fortune had certainly favoured us.
“ The barque happening to be about seven miles to the northward when the lull in the wind took place, and the fresh breeze coming out from S.S.E., threw her more dead to leeward, and then we knew she would lose a little time in picking up her boats. .
“The wind continued to freshen up, and we began to fear we were going to have too much of it for our advantage, and George stopped whistling.
“ A heavy sea was getting up, which, on a wind, was greatly to our disadvantage and in favour of our pursuer, and had the chase continued for a few hours longer she would certainly have overhauled us. Night, however, was
Digitized by Go ?le
300
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
coming on, and if we could keep out of range of her shot till darkness set in, we should be pretty sure to escape her.
“ The wind still increasing, we had to take in our upper small sails. The vessel, which had been making considerable water since we left port, leaked much worse on a wind in a heavy sea, and, to keep her perfectly clear, she was pumped every half-hour.
“ Since the wind had increased and the heavy sea had got up, the barque had gained considerably upon us, and just as it was getting dark she passed dead to leeward of us, closer than she had done yet, and we saw a flash and heard the report of a heavy gun. This was followed by two others, which was a demand for us to heave to; but as the shot fell short of us, and we knew she could come no closer on this tack, we paid no heed, and she kept on her tack to the northward.
“ We were now pretty safe for this day, and I began to consider what course it would be best for us to take when hid by darkness.
" When I considered what the barque would be likely to do, I thought that would depend upon what she guessed we would be likely to do.
“The boats had no doubt reported that the schooner was loaded with cotton, and that she was a valuable prize, and they would have her if possible.
“ After a good deal of pondering, I could come to no conclusion of what they might be likely to suppose or do, and I determined to put the schooner on her best leg and make as big a run as possible before daylight The wind blew fresh from S.S.E., and it looked black and squally towards the south. The barque was to the north-east of us, four or five miles distant
“ As soon as darkness fairly closed around, and the vessels were totally obscured from each other, we eased off sheets and headed away W. by S., giving her a free sheet, -and she rushed through the water at a good speed. George, still at the helm, looked in the direction of the barque and began singing, 'Good-bye to you, John Anderson my Jo!’
" The men now sat down to their supper, well worn out, after a most fatiguing and exciting day, but they were exceedingly jubilant, and rejoiced to think that we had beaten the Yankee cruiser.
“ I had a very little rum on board, which I got from Captain Downs, and I gave them ail a dram and thanked them, telling them that if we got safe to the end of the trip this day’s work would do for them to crow about for years to come.
“ George was quite sure we should escape and make a successful trip into port, because the vessel when she put to sea had a list to port. He asked me if I did not believe now that he could bring wind by whistling; I did not dispute the matter with him.
“ The wind continued the whole night, and we made a good run.
Digitized by GOOQle
MORNING, AND A CLEAR HORIZON.
301
and at daylight nothing was to be seen from the mast-head in any direction.”
This was now the fourth day out, and, as I had taken no observation on the
“ EVEKYOXE WAS J V Bl LAST ” (p. 299).
previous day, I was wishful of ascertaining our position, and got a good morning sight. The longitude of Brazos River being well determined, I had, while lying there, carefully tested the chronometer, and could depend upon it When I got the latitude
at noon, I found that we were just about 220 miles south by east of the mouth of Brazos River, the beating to windward of the previous day having taken us a good deal out of our course." *
• Extracted, by kind permission, from “Tho Adventures of a Blockade-Runner,” by William Watson. (London: T. Fisher Unwin. 1892.)
Digitized by
Google
302
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
After this, Mr. Watson made his way to Tampico without further adventure, and duly landed his cargo.
There is no question but that a rigidly-enforced commercial blockade is a very terrible weapon in maritime war; and the natural deduction from modern changes and the development of steam anti electricity leads to the belief that in future wars it may be more stringent than ever before—more stringent than in the Napoleonic War, more stringent than in the War of Secession. But the first necessity for its application is the command of the sea. Without that in the most absolute manner, there can be no effective blockade, or, indeed, no blockade at all.
Digitized by
Google
CHAPTER XIII
MODERN WEAPONS.
Guns—-Term? Used in Describing Them—Rifling—Breech-loader*—Projectiles—Old Classification— Armament—The Glatfon—The Jiainbotr—Long Odds—Armour Plating—Speed of a Shot-Gun v. Armour—Range of Fire—Quick-Firing Guns—Smokeless Powder—Cordite—Torpedo Boats—Search Lights—Hobart Pasha—Torpedoes—The “ Whitehead M—High Explosive Shells—The Dynamite Gun.
IT is proposed in this chapter to give some account of the chief offensive weapons of modem warships, the gun and the torpedo. Of the third great weapon, the ram, we have spoken elsewhere. The gun at a distance, the torpedo at close range, and the ram when ship touches ship in the last and fiercest stages of the battle, these arc the instruments which modern science has placed in the hands of our seamen.
For more than four hundred years, tho gun has been the queen of naval weapons. Striking its blow at a distance, capable of careful direction, concentration, or dispersion, at the will of the gunner, it has never lost favour with the seaman. Undoubtedly at the present day the gun retains its long-established supremacy, and tho warship is still primarily designed as a gun-carrier and as an effective gun-platform.
The subject of guns and gunnery is a very fruitful one and many pages might be devoted to it. It is not proposed here, however, to do more than give an account of the principal features and functions of our modern naval guns, together with a few illustrations of the work they are capable of doing in practice, or in actual war.
In order to make such an account at all intelligible to non-professional readers, it is necessary, at the outset, to give some brief explanation of the terms which are used in describing heavy guns. Everyone is more or less familiar with these terms in accounts of ships; but to many of those who read them they do not always convey any very accurate information, or serve as a useful guide in forming comparisons between one gun and another.
Digitized by LnOOQle
304
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
Our readers, therefore, will do well to devote explanation of terms and dimensions which is understand what a gun is, how its size and it is capable of accomplishing, will probably with more comprehension, and, consequently, hitherto done. Having said so much, let us
MECHANISM FOR BREECK-LOAD1NO ORDNANCE, (From a Drairiiig supplied by Sir W. G. Armstrong, MitcheU & Co.t Ltd.)
a little time to studying the here given. Those who once force are measured, and what read accounts of naval matters more interest, than they have come to the gun itself
The modern naval gun is a “ breech-loader,” made of steel, with a length varying from twenty-five to thirty-two calibres. The calibre of a gun is the diameter of the bore; and to say that a gun is so many calibres long means that the interior of the barrel is so many times as long as the diameter of the bore. Thus, a gun having a diameter of six inches (commonly called a six-inch gun), of twenty-six calibres will be 1735 inches long.
All modern guns are " rifled; ” that is to say, the barrel is traversed by a series of grooves, which pass in a spiral from breech to muzzle. The object of these grooves is, to give the twist or rotation to the shot which is required to keep it steady during its flight, and to prevent it from " wobbling,” or turning over. The number and depth of the
grooves varies in different guns, but all rifling is on one of two systems—viz., “uniform rifling” or “increasing rifling.” In the fonner, the pitch or twist of the rifling is the same throughout all parts of the barrel In the latter, the pitch or twist increases from the breech towards the muzzle. The measure used to describe the rifling of a gun is the number of complete turns made by a single groove within a given length of barrel equal to a particular number of “ calibres.” Thus, to speak of the rifling of a gun as being 1 in 30 means that a groove will make one complete twist in a length of barrel equal to thirty calibres. For instance, in a six-inch
Digitized by
Google
LOADING 47LNCH GUS WITH SHELL
20
Digitized by
Google
306
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
gun the complete twist would be completed in a length of 180 inches or fifteen feet
There are two systems of closing the breech of a heavy gun which are in general use throughout the world. The one is that known as the Krupp system, in which a solid wedge of metal is removed from the barrel of the gun near the breech; the shot is then pushed in from the rear, and the wedge dropped into its place again behind it.
The other system, which was first introduced into the French Navy, has now been adopted, with improvements, in our own service. It is known as the "screw relieve” system. A species of metal cork or stopper is inserted in the breech of the gun in rear of the charge. When the stopper, or breech-block, has been forced home, it is screwed firmly into place by a half-turn. The threads of the screw which secure it are cut away at regular intervals down the block; and thus a single half-turn causes the whole of the threads to engage, and firmly locks the breech. Other ingenious methods of closing the breech have been invented and applied to the quick-firing guns which are coming into universal use. The object in every case is to secure the most perfect closing of the breech, combined with the greatest rapidity of movement.
The escape of - the gases caused by the explosion is prevented by the use of a ring of asbestos, india-rubber, or some similar material, which is inserted near the head of the breech-block. This ring, known as the “obturator,” is expanded the moment the pressure of the explosion makes itself felt, and is forced against the sides of the chamber, effectually closing the breech until the pressure has ceased.
The projectiles used in modern heavy guns aro nearly all of the same shape, namely, elongated shot with conical heads. Occasionally, however, the shot is made with a blunt head, as it has been held by some that such a shape gives a better penetration through armour. In size, the shot varies from the little three-pound shell of the quick-firing gun to tho monster shell of the 110-ton gun, 2,000 pounds in weight, and standing, with its charge, nine feet high. The construction of the various projectiles is as varied as their size. There are the solid shot, made of hardened iron or steel, specially constructed to pierce hardened armour-plates; there is the common shell, which carries a large bursting charge, but which, at the same time, are strong enough to pierce armour-plates of moderate thickness, and to explode within the ship. There is the shrapnel shell, with thin walls, filled with bullets and with a charge of powder at the base. This shell is fitted cither with a "time” or percussion fuse; the former is a fuse ent to a particular length, the time of the explosion being regulated by the length of the fuse. The percussion fuse explodes when it comes in contact with a hard substance, such as the side of a ship. Sometimes a percussion and a time fuse is combined in the same shell.
Digitized by
Google
PROJECTILES.
307
the object being to secure the bursting of the shell in the air in case it does not actually strike the ship. The shrapnel is well described as the “ rnan-ktiling ” shell It is not capable of penetrating armour of any thickness, but its effect upon men exposed in the open is deadly. The powder at the base of the shell explodes, the thin walls of the shell give way, and the bullets are driven forward at high speed, spreading gradually out over a larger area, and forming what is called a cone of dispersion. The most effective use of the shrapnel is to burst it short of, and slightly above, the object aimed at The bullets are then driven forward in the same line, and sweep the area below with an iron hail.
Amour Piercing Shell.
Sterl Cohihion Shell.
SUCTION* OF SHELLS.
(Fadh « Drair.’/nj b^ Sir IK. U. Armstrong, Milcf.tll rf Co, Ltd.)
The ring, or segment, shell is made up of a thin outer coat, with a series of rings or segments built up inside. When the shell explodes, these fragments are driven in every direction, and an effect somewhat similar to that of shrapnel is produced. This shell is principally used in Germany.
In addition to the solid shot, common shell, and shrapnel, there is the canister shot, which, though rarely used, is still carried by ships of war. The canister shot, as its name implies, is an iron canister filled with bullets.. It is placed in the gun and fired in the ordinary way. The canister breaks up as it leaves the muzzle, and the balls spread very widely. This projectile would be of far greater value than it is if the bullets discharged from it kept together for a longer distance, and retained their velocity nj> to 2,000 yards. The result of experiment, however, has been to show that canister bullets lose their power of penetration a very short distance from the gun, and arc, consequently, of little use against torpedo-boats, as the shot will not even go through the thin steel sides of the boat.
Digitized by
Google
308
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
It lifts been already stated that all modern guns are rifled; that is to say, that grooves are cut inside the barrel which form a spiral or part of a complete spiral. The object of these grooves is to give a spin or rotation to the shot, and thus to steady it in its flight. There are many varieties in the form, number, and arrangement of the grooves, and there are several methods of making the shot follow the grooving. In some of our earlier guns, and in many of the German and French guns now in
8tX-lSCH URMCH-LOATHNO OCX.
(From a Drawing eupjtled try Sir W. (L Armstrong, Mitchell A Co,, Ltd.)
A. Elevating wheel, c. Elevating shaft.
4i, Elevating arc.
h. Recoil press drain hole.
j. Elevating pinion.
k, Recoil press ph ton rod.
tWL Axis of gun when horizontal. bb. Flange of roller path.
w. Roller palli.
use, the shot is coated with lead ; the soft lead is driven into the grooves, and is compelled to take the form of the rifling as it passes down the barrel. In our own muzzle-loading guns, the shots are fitted with copper studs or buttons, which fit into the grooves, and which are compelled to follow tho twist of the groove until the shot leaves the gun. In all our modern breech-loading guns the rotation is given by means of a gas-check or a dr it: tag-band. The former is a soft metal plate, fitted on to the base of the shot, and slightly larger in diameter than the shot itself. The latter is a soft metal band round the lower part of the shot. The force of the explosion drives the gas-check or the driving-band into the gun, and the soft metal of which it is formed is forced into the grooves in the barrel The necessary twist is thus given to the shot.
In the old days, guns were classed according to the weight of the shot they carried, and all readers of the old sea stories are familiar with the 24-pounder carronadcs, the long 18-pounders, and the small 6-pounders, which played so large a part in naval histories and in naval
Digitized by^OOQlC
CLASSIFICATION OF GUNS.
309
romances. The old plan gave a uniform and satisfactory scale when applied to the old guns, for the solid round shot increased in weight as they increased in diameter. Nowadays, a classification which depended on the weight of the shot would be altogether misleading. A rifled gun requires an elongated projectile, the weight of which will vary according to its length, and it will be possible to fire from the same gun projectiles of
Photo. Grigory <t Ca., Strand.
AFTER BARBETTE OF H.M.S. CA JfPRRDOFX, SHOWING 67-TON QVNS AND XAvmNE-GVNS,
different lengths and, consequently, of different weights. Moreover, a solid shot will weigh more than a hollow shell; a common shell and a shrapnel shell, though of precisely the same length and diameter, will vary in weight. Hence, it is plain that to give the weight of the shot is to afford no certain information as to the character and size of the gun.
A new method of description has been therefore, found necessary. Two plans have been adopted. A gun may be described by its weight. Thus, we have the 5-ton, the 22-ton, the 50-ton, etc.; or it may be described, and may be best described, by its “bore” or “calibre,” as a 47-inch, a 6-inch, a 9-inch, or a 12-inch gun, etc. Foreign guns are, of course, described by the more civilised measures of the metric system; thus, a 90 millimetre, a
Digitized by
Google
310 THE STORY OP THE SEA. *
16-centimetre, a 24-centimetre, a 34-centimetre, are equal respectively to a 3'6 inch, a 649-inch, a 945-inch, a 13 39-inch gun*
There is one point which must be remembered in estimating the relative values. The weight of a 7-inc h shot is, of course, more than one-seven th greater than the weight of the 6-ineh shot. The shot of the 92-inch gun weighs 380 lbs.; that of . the 12-inch gun weighs 714 lbs. The 47 shot weighs 45 lbs., the 6-inch shot weighs 100 lbs.
The size of the heavy guns used on board ship has varied greatly from time to time, but the • tendency has by no means always been in the direction of an increase of size. The guns carried by the English ships of Henry VIII.’s time were far heavier than the majority of the guns carried at Trafalgar. There is a 5-ton gun of Henry VIH.’s time to be seen at the Tower of London, and the principal armament of the Tudor ships was often made up of 30-pounders. Such heavy metal, however, was peculiar to the English ships. Our great rivals on the sea, the Spaniards, preferred the plan of building large ships with many small guns, and they suffered in consequence. Nothing is more remarkable in the story of the conflict between the Spanish ships of the Armada and their English opponents than the enormous superiority of gun power possessed by the latter. The Spaniards could not stand up against it. The great shot “ lacked ” their sides through and through; and, stout as were the timbers of the galleons, the 30-pound round shot in some cases went clean through them from side to side. The ships of the eighteenth century carried very light ordnance. The main armament of the Victory at Trafalgar consisted of thirty 32- and 42-pounders, thirty 24-pounders, forty 12-pouuders, and two 68-pounder earronadcs. The ship carried the two 68-pounder carronades in the bows, but these were new guns, which had been specially fitted, and for which fresh ports had to be cut. It had become evident during the course of the war that weight of metal gave an immense superiority to the ship that possessed it, and a marked illustration of the fact was afforded by the action between the Glutton, and a squadron of no less than eight French men-of-war. The whole story of the Glutton's action and tho events which led up to it is worth telling. In the first place, because it throws a strong light upon a subject we arc now dealing with, namely the effect of heavy artillery in naval war; and, in the second place, because in itself it furnishes a fine' example of English pluck and English seamanship, which are always worth rending about Up to nearly the close of last century the heaviest cannon in general use in the Navy were the long eighteen 12-pounders; but already carronades, or short guns carrying a much
* Roughly speaking, the English value of the centimetre may bo obtained by multiplying by four, and moving the decimal point one place. Thus, in the case of a 16-centimetrc gun, IC multiplied by 4 = 6 4 inches, the exact equivalent, as stated above, being 0 43 inches.
Digitized by
Google
*'A PRACTICAL ILLUSTRATION.”
311
heavier shot, had begun to come into use. These carronades were 32, and, in some cases, 42-potmders. It was not, however, till the year 1781 that an enterprising officer, Captain (afterwards Admiral Sir Henry) Trollope, prevailed upon the Admiralty to allow him to fit his ship, the Rainbow, with a gun of a weight till that time unknown in the Navy, namely, the 68-pounder carronade.
In order to understand how great a change was made in the armament and force of the Rainbow by the new armament, it will only be necessary to glance at the following table :— ,
H.M.S. RAINBOW.
OLD ARMAMENT.			NEW ARMAMENT.	
LONG GINS.				(A KUOS A DES.
First deck ...	26 18-pounders.	...		20	68 pounders.
Second deck...	22 12	>1	’-’	22	42 „
Quarter deck	—	—		4	32	„
Forecastle ...	2	6	JJ	■ ”	2	32	„
	44		48	
Total weight of	broadside	318 pounds	...	1,238	pounds.
It is true that the carronades did not carry very far, but then there was always a remedy for a defect of this kind where British seamen were concerned. If the enemy were too far off, the best plan was to get nearer to him; if possible, alongside him. It is said that at the battle of Trafalgar the Victory’s guns were depressed in order to prevent the shot going through both sides of the enemy and striking a friendly vessel beyond her, and that the ,; Number One ” of each gun on the lower decks actually stood by with a bucket of water ready to dash into tho hole made in the side of the opposing ship, to prevent the outbreak of fire.
Captain Trollope’s view was, that if you got near enough with the G 8-pounder carronade, it was the deadliest weapon upon the sea. At tho time he commissioned his ship, therefore, he made it his object to give practical effect to this view. On the 4th September, 1782, it seemed as if he were about to get an opportunity of giving a practical illustration of the value of his theory. On that day he fell in with a large French frigate off the lie de Bas. The frigate proved to bo the Hete, of forty guns. Captain Trollope promptly gave chase, and began firing with the two 32-pounder guns which he carried on the forecastle of the Rainbow. The aim was good, and soon some of the big round shot came ripping along the Frenchman’s deck. Some went overboard, but a few samples remained to show the quality of the rest. Then the French captain, who, besides being a gallant officer, was a man of a thoughtful mind, made a little calculation. “ If,” said he, " this English ship carries 32-pounder guns as
Digitized by
Google
312
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
bow-chasers, where in all reason, she ought to carry six-pounders only; what is it reasonable to suppose that she will carry on her broadside ? ” It will be observed that the calculation was a sensible one. Carried to its natural conclusion, it led to a result which was not satisfactory to the gallant officer. He did not wait to see the size of the 68-pounder shot After having fired one broadside " for the honour of the flag," the H&^ hauled down her colours, and surrendered to Captain Trollope. That officer was, probably, glad to have his prize upon such easy terms; but he was, no doubt, also somewhat pained at being deprived of the opportunity of experimenting with his 68-pounders, We shall see that fortune was kinder to him on. a subsequent occasion.
As for the H^M, her mission did not end with her capture. Beautiful as the Olympian cup-bearer from whom she took her name, her graceful lines formed the model for many a British frigate, furnishing thereby one more proof of the fact which long experience has established beyond doubt, that in the art of war-ship construction, the French could not only rival but beat our British naval architects.
Soon after the action between the Rainbow and the Hebe peace was declared, and it seemed as if Captain Trollope's chance had gone. But fortune favoured the brave, and it was not long before a fresh declaration of war set British and French ships fighting again all over the world. In 1795 the Admiralty purchased for the purpose of the Royal Navy several East Indiamen, and among them the Gia ft on, a vessel of 1,256 tons, named after her owners. The command of H.M.S. Glutton fell to Captain Trollope, and his heart must have rejoiced when he inspected the very formidable armament which hod been put on board her. This included no less than twenty-eight 68-pounder carronades on the lower deck. She carried fifty-six guns in all There were, however, one or two drawbacks to the arrangement. There were no bow-chasers, and the broadside carronades were so big that their muzzles nearly filled up the ports, and they could not be ttrained either fore or aft. In the month of July Captain Trollope put to sea. On the 15th he at last found the opportunity he had so long been in search of. Towards the evening of that day, while cruising off the coast of Flanders, the look-outs sighted a squadron of four ships. The Glutton immediately hoisted her ensign and prepared for action. As she approached the four vessels first sighted, others came in view, until at last the Glutton found herself in the presence of no less than eight ships, of which four were frigates like herself, two were corvettes, one a brig, and one a small cutter or “ snow.” Captain Trollope was not long left in doubt as to the nationality of the squadron; they hoisted French colours and shortened sail to allow the Glutton to come up with them. One ship to eight: it certainly looked terribly long odds, but Captain Trollope thought of that row of 68-pounders on the Glutton b lower deck, and resolved to take the risk.
Digitized by GooqIc
A GALLANT ACTION.
313
The French frigates were ranged in line ahead; the fourth was the biggest Captain Trollope accordingly ran past the first three with the purpose of engaging Number Four. So heavy was the fire from the Glatton that the Frenchman soon hauled off discomfited. The Glutton then engaged the second large frigate on her lee beam, and three of the smaller vessels on her lee quarter. There was a shoal lying close to leeward. The master
Photo, Gregory A Co., Strand,
WORKING QUICK-FIRING OUN, SHOWING THE USE OF BHOULDEB-FIECR
of the Glatton advised Captain Trollope to tack at once, to avoid going ashore. “ Wait till the enemy tacks,” was the captain’s reply, The enemy did tack, but the Glatton found great difficulty in following her example, her loss in men being insignificant, but her spars and rigging being cut to ribbons. The wind was fresh, and it seemed as if the topsails would carry away the broken yards. The men ran aloft to reef topsails under a smart fire, and for a time, the Glatton’s guns were silent. The enemy, thinking the game was over, advanced again, but soon got more than they wished
Digitized by
Google
314
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
for, and were compelled to draw off once more, accompanied by the brig and cutter, which had by this time joined in the action.
Night fell, and, under cover of the darkness, the crew of the Glatton did their best to repair damages. When morning broke the enemy were still in sight, and Captain Trollope once more made ready for battle. But the Frenchnjen had bad enough, the 68-pounders had done their work, and the whole squadron made its way as best it could to the shelter of the harbour of Flushing.
The result of the action was remarkable. A single British ship had successfully engaged a squadron of eight vessels. The Glatton# loss was two men wounded. The full particulars of the loss of the enemy cannot be ascertained with certainty. This much is known. The squadron consisted of the Brutus, a 74-gun ship, cut down to a 46-gun frigate; the Incorruptible, 38; the Magicien, 36; the R^publicaine, 28; and the two corvettes and the brig and cutter already referred to. Of the frigates, one sank in harbour from the result of the cannonade, another lost seventy of her crew killed and wounded, the remainder were more or less seriously injured, and none of them were in a condition to continue the action with the single British frigate.
If the Glutton had been armed with bow-chasers, it is probable that she would have captured at least one or two of the enemy's squadron. There was great enthusiasm at home when the news arrived of Captain Trollope’s success, as well there might be, for the odds of one to eight were phenomenal oven in those days of brilliant exploits. Captain Trollope was knighted, and the merchants of London presented him with a service of plate. The name of his ship has been preserved in the British Navy, and is borne at the present day by H.M.S. Glutton, a heavily-armed coast defence turret-ship.
The Glutton’s action will always remain as an example of the power of heavy metal when used in naval warfare. It is only when the weight and size of the gun involve sacrifices in respect of speed of handling and precision of fire, that weight ceases to be an advantage, but, cater is paribus, what was true in 1795 is true at this day, and the heavily-armed ships wilt crush the lighter ones as long as the battle has to be decided by gun-fire only.
With the introduction of armour-plating came the need for armourpiercing guns, and from that date the size and power of naval guns steadily increased. The 12-ton, the 25-ton, the 35-ton, the 38-ton, and the 80-ton gun, all muzzle-loaders, were introduced and fitted in the turret-ships. In 1890 the climax was reached in the monster 110-ton breech-loading guns, which were mounted upon the Victoria, Sansparcil, and Benbow. These gigantic weapons were produced in deference to a strong demand that, in the matter of armament, British ships should not be allowed to fall
Digitized by
Google
THE CLIMAX IN BIG GUNS.
315
behind foreign vessels. The Italians had mounted 100-ton guns on several of their great ironclads. We replied with 110-ton guns, but, by almost universal consent, these guns have now been discarded, and their places taken by more manageable weapons of scarcely less power, and of much greater endurance. The accidents to the 110-ton guns were frequent. The explosion of such enormous charges as 9G0 pounds of powder behind a shot of a ton weight proved too great a strain for even the most perfect workmanship and the most enduring materials. With fairly good fortune, it is calculated that the life of a 110-ton gun is limited to seventy-five rounds, fired with full charges. The enormous size and freight of the gun are also serious objections to its use on board ship. The length of the 110-ton gun is 43 ft 8 in. A pair of such guns, with their mountings and the turret in which they are enclosed, weighs about 900 tons. An elaborate hydraulic appliance is needed to bring both shot and powdercharge up to the gun. The shot weighs 2,000 lbs., the powder charge 960 lbs. in weight; the powder and shot together stand nine feet high. A miss with such a gun means the discharge of £160 worth of public property into space. It is true that when the shot from such a gun does strike, it strikes to some purpose. The speed of a shot from the muzzle of a 110-ton gun is 2,087 feet a second. The blow struck by the shot is equal to 55,253 foot-tons. Some idea of what might be the effect of such a shot is given by this remarkable diagram, prepared by Messrs. Armstrong, which
DIAGRAM OF 110-TON B.L. ARMSTRONG GUN PENETRATION.
Henle jJ,,
THE SHOT TO SAKE SCALE.
Weight of charge ...........8C0lb.
Hol tier A P. Shell.........1,813 lb.
DUtAnce to plate ...........172 pin.
Muzzle velocity ............2,093 f. s.
Striking velocity ..........2,079 f a.
Bn’wn's Compound Plate ... 7ft nq.
Thicknas ....................20 iu8.
Iron backing plate..........8 ins.
(>ak balks backing..........20 ft.
Butt ...	...............22 ft.
Consistingof-Granite blocks 5 It.
Concrete.....................11 ft.
Brickwork ...................fl CL
shows the course or the shot through a variety of obstacles, steel, iron, brick, and wood.
There will always, of course, be a very great difference between the theoretical penetration of a shot, as shown by its power of piercing an armour-plate set up for experimental purposes at right-angles to the gun
Digitized by
Google
316
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
at a range of fifty yards, and the penetration of the same shot fired under the varying conditions of actual service at sea. Many shot will strike at an angle, and the range will, as a rule, be greatly in excess of the experimental range. The armour may be expected to do all, and more than all, that its makers promise for it: it will, undoubtedly, prove an enormous protection to those parts of the ship which it covers.
There is, however, one example of penetration in actual warfare which is so remarkable that it must be mentioned here. In one of the perennial South American wars which was going on during the year 1893, the Argentine ironclad Independencia engaged the rebel ironclad of the same nationality, named the Andes. A 24 c.m. (9 4-inch) shot fired from the Independent: la, struck the Andes, and actually penetrated through no less than three thicknesses of armour plating, with a total thickness of 15| inches. The maximum theoretical penetration of this gun was 19 inches. This is the nearest approach to experimental results which has ever been obtained under service conditions.
The speed with which the shot fired from naval guns start upon their journey has been gradually increasing for many years past. This speed, which is known as the " muzzle velocity ” of the projectile, is measured by the rate of travel of the shot at the moment it leaves the muzzle of the gun. The rate has gone up from 1,200 feet a second to over 3,000 feet a second in the case of experiments marie with specially-constructed guns of great length, which have been fired in this country, and in France. The muzzle velocity of the British breech-loading guns now in use varies from 1,600 to 2,100 feet a second, and this last figure will probably soon be largely exceeded by guns actually carried on ship-board. It is possible to measure with great accuracy the rate of flight of the shot. For the purpose screens are fitted up in the line of fire, arranged in such a way that the shot cuts in succession a series of wires stretched across the respective screens. An interval of time elapses between the passage of the shot through each wire; this interval, which is, of course, far too minute to be capable of observation by the eye, is recorded with perfect accuracy by the electric apparatus attached to the wire. The electric contact is either made or interrupted by the shot, and the interval between the contact on any two screens gives a measure of the rate of flight of the shot. Many interesting photographs have, moreover, been taken of shots actually in flight. Most successful pictures of heavy projectiles have been made in Germany and elsewhere, and in this country Mr. Boys, F.R.S., has recently exhibited at the Royal Society a series of very perfect photographs of an aluminium bullet passing through the air at the rate of 3,000 feet a second. This astonishing result was obtained in the following manner :—Two lead wires were placed in the path of the shot at a distance apart slightly less than that of the bullet The wires were connected to
Digitized by GOOQle
Fig. 2.	Fig. 4.
PHOTOGRAPHS OF PROJECTILES IN FLIGHT. (7uLa &Wr../.,«..r C V. r. << f i>^ Ropd SorM,,.)
Fig. I.—Ritie bullet ^netrating a slicct of glans.	Ep. X—A rille bullet in flight, showing the air-wave* following the bullet.
Fig. 2. ■ Ri tic bullet after it* paxwgr, showing fragments nf glass following the allot.
Digitized by GOOQle
318
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
a jar electrically charged. In front of the wires was placed a small camera. The instant the shot in its flight, after passing through the first wire, came in contact with the second wire, the electric circle was completed; a spark passed, and by the light of this instantaneous flash a clear impression of the flying, bullet was taken upon the sensitive plate of the camera.
The changes which we have noticed in the size of the guns borne in ships of war have had their parallel in the changes which have occurred in respect of the number and positions of the guns carried. The Henri Grdce a Dieu of Henry VIII.’s time carried twenty-three heavy guns, of which four were 60-pounders. The Victory was a 100-gun ship; the Duke of Wellington, the last of the great wooden screw line-of-battleships, carried 131 guns. The introduction of armour-plating at once led to a reduction in the number of guns. The specific gravity of iron is greater than that of water, and every foot of armour consequently reduced the buoyancy of the ship to which it was applied. It was essential, therefore, even on thinly-armoured vessels such as the Warrior, to concentrate the guns in order to give them the protection of' the armour. The three decks were abandoned in favour of a single deck. The process, once begun, was bound to continue. As the gun grew in power, the armour which was to exclude its projectile increased in thickness and, consequently, in weight. Soon the armament of an ironclad was diminished to four heavy guns, as in the Devastation and Inflexible, and even to a pair of guns, as in the Hotspur and Rupert. The 24-inch plating of the Inflexible could only be employed to protect a small portion of the ship, and the heavy armour was, in consequence, confined to the central part of the vessel and to the two turrets in which the great 80-ton muzzle-loading guns were carried
It seemed as if a stage would soon be reached at which the ship would be transformed into a mere raft with a single gun, carried in a heavy turret in the centre; and, indeed, such ships were actually designed.
But, from this view, there has been a steady reaction, the result of several causes acting and reacting upon one another. Ships of very low free-board—that is to say, with a very short space between the waterline and the deck-level—were slow and difficult to fight in a seaway. The guns, carried only a few feet above the water-line, had no command. It became necessary to raise the ship’s side, for the double purpose of getting a better sea-boat and a better gun-platform. The result was to expose a greater mark to the enemy’s fire. But the part so exposed could not be wholly protected by thick armour; no ship could bear such a load. The thin armour, which could alone be used, might be penetrated by guns less powerful, but more easily handled, than those in the turrets, which formed the main armament of the ship. Lighter guns were accordingly introduced, and, having got the smaller gun, every effort was made to get the best value out of it. A rapid process of development led up to the
Digitized by Google
RANGE OF FIRE.
319
quick-firing gun with a high muzzle velocity and an extraordinary power of penetration. Meanwhile, as usual, improvements in the manufacture of armour went hand-in-hand with improvements in the gun. Compound armour, or iron plates with a hardened steel or chilled iron face, and steel armour, gave greater protection, with less weight, than the old wrought-iron plates. It was possible, therefore, to give armoured protection to the upper parts of vessels in which the smaller guns or “secondary batteries,” were carried The use of “nickel-steel,” or steel hardened by the admixture of a small amount of nickel as an alloy, and of " Harveyised ” steel has carried the process still further, and the extremely hard plates which are now being manufactured are proving almost, if not quite, a match for the smaller guns. Harveyised steel is steel of which the surface has been made extremely hard by the introduction of an excess of carbon into the steel composing the face of the plate while at a very high temperature. The plate is water-hardened after the process of carbonisation. The result has been found in practice to give a surface of extraordinary resisting power, with a backing of tougher steel, which resists the tendency to crack peculiar to the hardened portion.
Meanwhile, the tendency to increase the number of guns carried has been very marked. It has been the object of constructors to minimise the risk by multiplying and distributing the guns, and at the same time to secure great concentration of fire by placing the guns in such positions that several can be brought to bear at the same time on one spot. Thus, in a modern ironclad such as the Royal Sovereign, we find an approach to the number of guns carried by the old line-of-battleships. The Royal Sovereign actually bears no less than forty-two guns as follows:—
4 67-ton B.L.
10 6-in. B.L, quick-firing.
16 C-pounder B.L.,
12 3- „	B.L.,
Total 42 and Eight machine-guns.
Among the many improvements in naval guns is the great extension which has been given to the range of fire. The actual ability to fire a projectile a very long way is not in itself of great advantage. In practice, the occasions when it would be necessary or desirable to fire at an object four or five miles distant, would be very rare. Occasionally it may be necessary to do so. Only a short time ago, a large new fort was erected close to one of our large naval arsenals, in order to protect the dockyard from the fire of ships three or four miles off, and is hidden from view by intervening hills. A dockyard is a large object to shoot at, and a shell falling in any part of it may do a considerable amount of damage. Still the range is, of course, some indication of power, and
Digitized by
Google
320
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
a gun which will carry a 900 lb. shot many miles through the air is, necessarily, a gun which will shoot very hard up to 2,000 or 3,000 yards, the probable distance of the naval battles of the immediate future. But though a long range is not tn itself an end to be sought for, there are some facts with regard to the long-shooting of modern guns which are so remarkable that they deserve notice here.
In the year 1887, a “ round for range ” was fired experimentally from a 9-inch wire gun at Shoeburyness. The result was extraordinary. The shot, weighing 380 lbs., was picked up at a distance of no less than 21,263 yards—in other words, twelve mile# one hundred and forty-three yards—from the muzzle of the gun. The drawing (p. 319) shows the course of the shot, and a very strange fact appears when we examine it. The long curve is the path traced by the shot; the outline below is that of Mont Blanc drawn to scale. In other words, the extreme height of the trajectory of the shot was no less than four
miles, or more than a mile over the summit of the giant Swiss mountain. A bombardment of the Vai d’Aosta from Chamounix is evidently among the possibilities, though we trust not among the probabilities, of war. It is noteworthy that the actual distance covered with the shot was in excess of the calculated range, a circumstance which is explained by the fact that, in performing the calculation, sufficient allowance had not been made for the diminished resistance offered by the air at the extreme height of six miles above the earth’s surface.
Digitized by LnOOQle
Digitized by
Google
Digitized by GOOQle
QUICK-FIRING GUNS.
321
Xo account of the guns in use on ships of war would be complete which did not include a reference to the “ quick-firing guns ” which are now rapidly taking the place of all the guns previously in use up to and including the 6-inch The object of the quick-firing gun is to make the process of loading as rapid as possible, and to get rid of the necessity of running the gun in and out before each discharge. To achieve the first of these objects, a vast amount of ingenuity has been applied to the breech mechanism, and various plans have been adopted by the different gun-makers. In all of them- the actions of
opening and shutting the breech are accomplished in one or two motions. The cartridge in all the smaller quick-firing guns is made after the pattern of a rifle cartridge, with a brass cose containing the powder and with the shot attached to it.
The cartridge case is extracted and thrown out by the opening of the breech-block. In the larger guns it has been found inconvenient to combine powder and shot in one cartridge, the shot alone weighing 100 lbs., and the cartridge case, fully charged, weighing 30 lbs. In these guns, therefore, the shot is first inserted, and the brass case, containing the powder put in afterwards. In order to avoid the necessity of running the gun in and out, very powerful hydraulic buffers are placed upon the gun-carriage. These buffers are arranged in such a way as to
WORKING A SEARCH-light.
move with the gun, and, in consequence, as soon as the gun is fired it is brought to rest by the buffers, and is kept in tho same line in which it was pointing when fired. Tliis is a most important point. In the first place, the arrangement allows of the gun being mounted upon a rigid pedestal, which can he fixed in any part of the ship. In the second place, it permits the gunner to fire shot after shot at the object without relaying or reaiming the gun. The smaller quick-firing guns, up to the 12-pounder, are usually fixed on pedestals along the ship’s side, or in the tops. They are balanced, and swing lightly in any direction. A crutch, or shoulder-piece, is fastened to the side of the gun, and a pistol-trigger is placed underneath it; the gunner standing behind the gun places his shoulder against the padded crutch, and with his finger upon the pistol-trigger, can sway a heavy gun up
21
Digitized by GOOQle
322
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
or down, or from side to side, almost as easily as if it were a fowling-piece. The rapidity with which these guns can be loaded and fired is most remarkable. From the 3-pounder gun, no less than twenty-five aimed shots can be fired in a minute. Even from the great 6-inch 100-pounder guns, carried on big ironclads like the Royal Sovereign, three shots can be fired in such rapid succession that all three projectiles will be in the air at the same time. Tire quick-firing guns in use in the British Navy at the present time are the 3-pounder, the 6-pounder, the 12-pounder, the 47-inch, and the 6-inch.
Every Naval Power has now adopted a smokeless powder of some kind. In the British Navy, “ cordite,” a nitro-glycerine compound, has been selected, and
TOBriDO-BOAT AKO HBAHCH-LICHT.
is already a service charge for guns up to and including the 6-inch 54-ton gun. In time, cordite will be made available for the heavier guns, and its adoption for the large 50-ton guns of the Victorious, Casar, and other ships of the same class has been already decided upon. The sooner it is used in all naval guns the better. In these days of torpedo attacks, the dense cloud of white smoke which follows the discharge of a heavy gun loaded with ordinary black powder constitutes a terrible danger to the ship which is firing.
Those who have seen a ship firing on a dull day when there is little wind, and when the sea-fog hangs heavily on the water, will have noticed how the great billows of wliite powder smoke come rolling and tumbling from the muzzle of the gun and settle down sullen and impenetrable upon the water. Then is the time, by night or by day, for the adventurous torpedo-boat to approach under cover of the smoke.
The smoke difficulty, always serious, became more serious than ever when the quick-firing gun was introduced. The very object of the gun was to fire round after round at an approaching torpedo-boat within the short space of time occupied by the flying vessel in traversing the distance which will bring her within effective torpedo range. But no sooner have a couple of shots been discharged than the veil of the powder smoke clothes the ship’s side, and ere it lifts the torpedo-boat has safely accomplished its errand, and has discharged
Digitized by booQle
SHIF F. TORPEDO.
323
its terrible weapon unscathed. Clearly, the quick-firing gun made smokeless powder a necessity. Now cordite has been introduced, and, during the daytime at any rate, the chances are bad for the torpedo-boat
But by night, when the look-out men can see not a yard into the .thick wall of darkness, when the whistling of the wind and the restless shuffle of the hastening seas drown all other sounds, how will a ship of war fare then in the presence of a determined torpedo-boat attack ? That is a problem which the actual experience of war has not yet fully solved. There are many who hold that a ship so attacked will have fallen on evil times. Much, it is true, may be done by a bright look-out, and then, are there not always the quick-firing guns discharging their eight or ten shells in a minute ? Is there not also the ingenious contrivance by which a little glow of electric light on fore-sight and back-sight enables the gunner to align his gun, even in the darkest night ? Lastly, is there not the electric projector, with its gigantic ray, capable of piercing the darkness for over a mile, and of searching out a complete circle round the threatened ship? Yes; all these things there undbiibtedly are, but there is reason to doubt whether, armed with them all, the peril will not be great—nay, deadly in the extreme. A sharp look-out may catch a glimpse ef a fleeting spark upon the waters, which his practised eye tells him is neither a star reflected from the sky above, nor yet a scatter of phosphorus sparks from the sea below, but the glint from an open furnace door, the glare from an overpressed funnel, or the ray from a.carelessly-displayed hand-lantern, Nay, more, the look-out may even hear, above the sough of the wind and the plash of the ship’s counter as she plunges forward with each coming wave, the beat of high-pressure engines forcing the twin screws of the torpedo-boat through the water at 350 revolutions a minute. But, if he hear this, then indeed the peril is close at hand.
Grant, however, that he be warned, and warned while the enemy is still comparatively distant; grant that the hail rings through the ship, “torpedo-boat on the starboard quarter,” and that, in instant response to the bugle call, the ship’s company are at their posts without a moment’s delay, will his alertness even then save the ship ? Doubtless, at the first sound of alarm, every man will be ready at the post to which, in time of war, he will already have been assigned. Guns will be loaded, ammunition will be handy, the dynamos will be ready to supply the full current to the electric light. It is fair and reasonable to assume that every preparation which prudence, skill, and experience can suggest will
have been made. But what then ? the starboard quarter of the ship wooden crutch of the 6-pounder or right hand on the pistol trigger, or
The gunners at the quick-firing guns on stand by, keen and ready, each with the 3-pounder gun fitted into his shoulder, his the electric button. Science has supplied
him with electric sights, and he has under his hand a gun which will shoot as accurately on the sights up to 1,200 yards as a pea-rifle up to forty yards. But what does this accuracy mean ? It means that an error of half a degree in the
Digitized by Google
324
THE STORY OF THE BEA.
elevation produces an error of 300 yards. It means that if the object be clearly seen, if it be stationary, if its range be ascertained, then, if the gun be properly laid the shot will, as a matter of absolute certainty, strike the object ten times out of ten. But what are the circumstances here ? The object dimly seen
A TuarBUO-BOAT SEEN 1X031 BEHIND THE BEA1LCH -EIGHT,
through the night, is approaching on a diagonal line at the rate of 800 yards in every minute. Every second it changes both its position and direction in relation to the gun. Nor is this all; the same heave of the sea which is making the torpedo-boat lift her fore-foot out of the water at every rise is making the big ship roll slowly through an arc of 20 degrees, and the roll passed on to the nine or sixteen feet barrels of the quick-firing guns is causing the muzzle of the gun to describe great circles in the air, now dipping far below, now rising high above the flying form of the torpedo-boat.
No; laying by the sights on a dark night may be tried, but the chances against its success are infinitely great. But it will be said, " Why not make use of the artificial daylight which lies stored within your dynamos ? ” Why not flood the sea with the bright beam of the electric light, and show up the enemy, black and sharp, upon an illuminated sea ?" Such an aid may be sought,
Digitized by
Google
THE SEARCH-LIGHT.
325
and probably will often be sought; but to those who have studied the effect of the electric light used from a ship it must seem more than doubtful whether the danger will not be aggravated rather than diminished. It is true that a projector placed low down on the ship’s side may succeed in showing up the enemy, and such practice as can be made in its deceiving glamour may possibly, within the short interval allowed, bring the boat to a standstill. True, also, that the dazzling ray may confuse and mislead the crew of the torpedo-boat. But, after all, a man who is trying to find the Eddystone Lighthouse has a good chance of not missing his way, and a 20,000 candle-power lamp is as fine a guide as may be to the big ship's whereabouts. Still, where there is a single torpedo-boat, the electric light may serve a single ship. But suppose there be two, three, or four boats; and the chances—nay, it may be said the certainties—are that nowadays the torpedo-boats will hunt in groups, what then will be the protection afforded by the electric beam ? Where the great white ray lights upon the waters there, indeed, is day as at noon in the sunshine; but go one foot outside the shhrply-defined edges of the Jbeam on either side; there there is no “ penumbra," no half-light; the transition from light to darkness, from white to black, from day to night, is intense and complete. A boat within this dark area is hidden as effectually as if she were the other side of the world. The eyes of those on the ship, dazzled by looking into the bright ray, will not pierce the thick blackness which contrasts so sharply with
IN FRONT OP THE BEARCH-LIGHT.
Digitized by^OOQlC
32G
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
it, oiul a boat may come almost alongside without being detected by the keenest look-out as long as it keeps outside the pathway of light through which its less fortunate companion is making its way. Probably, therefore, in most cases where a single ship is attacked at night by a group of torpedo-boats, the truest safety will be found in keeping under way and maintaining a bright look-out through the darkness, and using the quick-firing guns as a sportsman uses Jiis gun. Ask a first-rate shot whether, when he stands behind a bank and brings down right and left the whirring grouse that arc driven over his head, he aligns back-sight and fore-sight, and goes through the routine of a volunteer recruit at a rifle-butt. Assuredly he will tell you that he does nothing of the kind. He will tell you that long practice has brought hand, eye, and brain to work together by an unerring instinct, that direction, elevation, allowance for flight, are all included in one operation which follows the impulse of the will, as surely as the foot is guided to its place in running or walking, or the hand to the mouth when eating. That is how a sportsman hits a moving object, and that is how the best value will be got out of the quick-firing guns, especially at night. The gun, it must be remembered, pivots and swings as easily upon its stand as a shot-gun in the hand of a sportsman. The aim is taken from the shoulder by means of the long wooden crutch lined with india-rubber, which is attached to the gun, and the firing is instantaneous at the will of the man who takes the aim. Practice will undoubtedly do for the seaman gunner what it does for the sportsman on shore, and the direct and most effective shooting with the quick-firing gun will be made by the man who has learnt to know his weapon, and to make aiming and pointing a matter of instinct, rather than a matter of drill
But be the vigilance of the look-out and the skill of the gunners what it may, there can be little doubt that the risk to a single ship attacked at night by a group of torpedo-boats will be very grave indeed. He will be an unwise officer who runs such a risk. It has already fallen to the lot of one British officer to have to protect himself against just such an attack as that described. Hobart Pasha, when commanding the Turkish Fleet in the Black Sea in 1877, was for many nights exposed to attack by groups of boats armed both with the spar and Whitehead torpedo. Neither attack nor defence had at that time reached its present pitch of perfection in the matter of appliances, nor can it be said that the skill and discipline of cither Turkish or Russian sailors were in exact correspondence with whet might be expected from the carefully-trained crews of the Western Powers. But the main conditions of the problem were then what they would be now, and it is therefore interesting to note how Hobart Pasha mot them. He recognised at once that the difficulty of repelling a combined attack made in the darkness must be very great Night after night, therefore, he gave strict orders that all lights should be extinguished, that the ship should steam away into the darkness under the shadow of the coast, and there, using all possible vigilance in the event of discovery, lie
Digitized by LnOOQle
HOBART PASHA AND THE RUSSIAN TORPEDOES.
327
hidden from the torpedo-boats which were searching for her. The sea is wide, the hours of night are short, and woe betide the torpedo-boat that is found in broad daylight near to a fast and heavily-armed ship in anything like a sea way! The Russians sought, but they did not find. Only once did the boats, armed with the Whitehead torpedo, discover the Admiral’s ship, and dark, indeed, would have been her fate if the weapons used had been the perfected instruments of to-day and had been in the hands of highly-trained specialists. Four
x. The JjaniVwhtel for running the tur-pedo-tlibe In ar nhL
K The handle for coDducting the rear end of tube.
<_ The tripper fur starting the engines of the torpedo.
ji. Locking-piece for locking torpedo* tube when out.
k. Rollers on which the telescopic portion of the torpedo-tube travels!.
r. Bora and socket Joint.
ii. Port door.
J. Screw-Bhaft for running torpedo in and out,
it Flange for onnnecHng the rear cud of the torpedo-tube.
r, Chamber for cordite cartridge,
m. Torpedo.
x* The rear end of the torpedo-tube, which is detachable for convenience of stowage,
p. Outer torpedo-tube which carries the telescopic part.
q. Rear door of torpedo-tube.
torpedoes were actually fired ; one struck the ship’s cable and glanced off, another struck the ship’s bow and also passed off without explosion; it appears to have been at half-cock. Two other torpedoes missed the ship, ran ashore, and were picked up by the Turks. Fortune favoured Hobart Pasha, but the terrible nature of the risk which followed the discovery of his ship in the darkness was made clear enough.
That the torpedo-boat at night, especially if acting in company, is a most terrible and dangerous enemy is beyond doubt. In the daytime.
Digitized by
Google
328
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
however, it must be admitted, that its terrors are greatly diminished. In the first place, it is seen from the mast-head as soon as it is on the horizon, and forewarned is forearmed. In the second place, the quick-firing gun in daylight asserts its full and tremendous power; no need to take elaborate calculations as to range. A shot beyond and a shot short of the object—a “ bracket,” as the gunners call it—give the range, which must needs lie between the two ranges tried for the experimental shots. Then, as shell after shell strikes the water or explodes and shows the exact error of the aim, that aim can be corrected with certainty, and crash goes the 6- or 12-pound shell through the thin scantling of the boat; or, better still, pierces the shell of the high-pressure boiler. Scotched or killed, the boat is at the mercy of the ship, and the danger is over. Moreover, it must not be forgotten that the torpedo-boat which runs her twenty or twenty-five knots on the measured mile in smooth water is a very different performer when the sea rises and checks and buffets her with every wave. Her crew see the big
I'K-Au. W’, (irratirf & Go., Strand.
TORPEDO BTU11E&, PORTSMOUTH DOCKYARD,
ship suddenly bearing down, and they realise that, from being the hunter, they have become the hunted. Full speed ahead is the only chance. A stern chase is a long chase, and engines and boilers will doubtless be pressed to their fullest capacity. But lucky will be the torpedo-boat crew if before long
Digitized by GOOQle
SHIP v. TORPEDO.
329
they are not aware that the big ship astern of them is gradually showing up larger and larger against the horizon; lucky if they are not made aware of her proximity by seeing the flash from one of her bow-guns, followed by the springing of a great fountain of water high into the air beside them, as a shell from a 6-inch gun comes hurtling through the air from the steady platform of the cruiser. Then all will depend upon good engines, good stoking, the
Flwlu. Str W. ci. Ar nut ruin;, Mitchtll d Co,, LttL
FIRING A TORPEDO.
number of hours of daylight, the proximity of a friendly port, and the shooting of the enemy—and luck. Given daylight, a tumble of sea, and a fair chase, the odds on the cruiser are very long ones indeed.
If the torpedo be ranked after the gun in importance as a weapon of naval warfare, it is not because its effect, when successfully used, is less terrible than that of the largest gun, but simply because the conditions under which it can be successfully used are much more limited than in the case of the gun. As everyone knows, the Whitehead torpedo now used in the British and many other navies is “ automobile; ” that is to say, it moves through the water by the force stored up within itself The torpedo itself is a long steel tube, 18 inches in diameter and 16 feet 7| inches in length. The front end is brought to a rather blunt point, and is furnished with metal whiskers or strikers, which act as triggers when the torpedo strikes a stationary object and detonate the explosive charge which it carries.
Digitized by LjOOQle
330
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
The rear of the torpedo tapers away to a fine point like the tail of a mackerel, and at the extremity are two small screws, one behind the other, which, driven at a very high speed and in opposite directions, propel the weapon through the water. The body of the torpedo is divided into three chambers; the front one, which is detachable and is separately, stored in the magazine until required for use, contains the gun-cotton charge, weighing in the largest torpedoes as much as nearly 200 lbs. of dry gun-cotton. The centre compartment is a chamber for holding compressed air, which is forced into it at a pressure of 90 atmospheres, or 1,350 lbs. on the square inch. Compressed air is used to work the marvellously compact little set of engines which are enclosed in the third compartment, and which drive the twin screws. These engines are capable in the case of the latest pattern of driving the torpedo through the water at a speed of no less than 30 knots. There are also, within the body of the torpedo, ingenious contrivances for directing the course of the weapon, and for causing it to travel at a uniform depth below the surface of the water, and to rise to the surface at a given point in case the torpedo misses the object at which it is aimed Nearly all sea-going men-of-war are now fitted with tubes for discharging torpedoes. Some of these are above the water-line, but the growing tendency is to place them below the water-line. The danger of bringing the large charge of gun-cotton with a detonator inserted in it above the water-line while a ship is in action and under a heavy fire is so great that it seems doubtful whether any officer will risk the discharge of a torpedo from an above-water tube save under very special circumstances. In the earlier patterns the torpedo was expelled from the tube by means of compressed air forcing it from behind. Tliis method, however, has now been abandoned, and a small charge of powder placed at the base of the tube suffices to start the weapon. As the torpedo passes out of the tube a catch disengages the starting lever of the engines, and by the time the screws are in the water they are revolving at full speed. At its appointed depth below the surface the torpedo speeds upon its way, leaving no record of its course save a few bubbles which rise to the surface. Woe betide the ship which it strikes fairly! , The extreme range of the torpedo is considerable, but the range for practical purposes within which it can be used with comparative certainty does not exceed GOO yards. Attempts have been made to meet the attack of the Whitehead torpedo by the use of heavy steel nets hung round the sides of ships at anchor, and some tunes even of ships under way. Many of our ships are fitted with these nets, but little dependence can now be placed upon them. A ship encumbered with the enormous load of the steel nets is practically incapable of movement, and is a prey to ram attack and gun-fire. Moreover, the high speed at which the torpedoes now run is sufficient to enable them to cut through the strongest nets which have yet been devised, and a special cutter capable of severing the steel nets is now* generally attached to the torpedo. The true and only defence against
Digitized by
Google
HIGH EXPLOSIVES.
331
the Whitehead torpedo is to keep out of its effective range, and to rely upon gun-fire to disable the ship which carries iL
It would not be right to leave the subject of guns and torpedoes without some reference to the attempt which has been made to combine the power of
Photo. H'. Ortgury <f Q>h Strawl.
TORPEDO AND TUBE ON H,MJ. PALLAK
the gun and the torpedo in a single weapon. The torpedo, as is well known, carries in its steel head a charge of no less than 200 lbs. of gun-cotton, a terrific explosive, far more destructive in its effect than gunpowder. Exploding under water, the resistance of the water itself serves as a second gun and directs the force of the explosion upon the line of least resistance, namely, that offered by the ship’s side. But the torpedo, deadly as it is, has its limitations in respect of range, ease of direction, and adaptability to land defence. Attempts are constantly being made, therefore, to insert in ordinary shells some high explosive such as gun-cotton or nitro-glycerine. Much progress has already been made in this direction. The French use melinite, and the Germans have already adopted a high explosive in their shells. There are, however, some practical difficulties in the way of achieving complete success with a nitro-glycerine shell. It is difficult to restrain the explosion of the shell until it has passed through the armour-plate and the burst on the outside is comparatively ineffective. Moreover, the shell can only be used above water. The Zalinxki dynamite-gun is an apparatus which has been constructed in the United States, and has since been made the subject of an experiment by the British Navy, It consists of a very long
Digitized by
Google
332
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
tube, through which a long shell containing a heavy charge of dynamite is propelled by pneumatic pressure on exactly the same principle as a pea through a pea-shooter. The projectile is steadied in its flight by a sort of tail resemblmg the leathers used to steady an arrow in its flight. As the gun is immovable, the range has to be regulated by alterations in the airpressure. It has been found possible to calculate with great precision the curve which will be made by the shell with any given pressure of air, and wonderfully accurate shooting has been the result. The effect of one of these enormous projectiles exploding on or near a ship is fearfully destructive. Entering the water close to a ship’s side, the shell is exploded either by a time-fuse or by the entry into the water, and the effect is that of a heavily-charged torpedo. The gun has obvious disadvantages, and seems to have no future at sea. Its range is not as great as that of an ordinary gun, and the vessel carrying it might easily be destroyed before she could deliver a shot. But, on land, where all distances are known and where a steady platform can be obtained, the weapon may prove very formidable in a scheme of harbour defence.
Digitized by GOOQle
CHAPTER XIV.
METHODS OF NAVAL WARFARE (continued)—CONVOY AND PRIVATEERS.
Origin and Importance of Convoy—British Loews in Convoy—Captain Seth Jermy—How ho Fought Six French Galleys and Saved his Merchantmen—Misbehaviour of Merchantmen—Sir John Jerri*' Way with Selfish Captains—Rich Hauls by Our Navy—Anson and the Acapulco Galleon—Quarrels Over Prize-money—Rich Hauls by Privateers—Woodos Rogers and the Manila Ship—French Privateers —Jean Bart—His Escape from Prison—Du Guay-Trouin—Paul Jones “the Pirate”—Early Life — His Attack on Whitehaven—At Selkirk Hall—Jones Captures the Ranker—The Fight oS Flamborough Head—Banhommt Richard v. Strapit—The Serapit Strikes.
IN a previous chapter we have treated of blockades; but there is another method of striking at an enemy's commercial prosperity. This is, to catch and conquer his merchant ships upon the high seas. In former times, at any rate, this was the favourite method; whether it would be wise or not for England to attack her foe nowadays in this way is another question. She might cripple that foe’s resources, no doubt; but so much of the carrying trade of the world has passed into English hands, that she might very well be injuring herself at the same time. It was all very well for Commodore Wager to take the great' galleon, or Anson to loot the Acapulco ship; ship and treasure belonged to the enemy until we took them, but now the treasure and the ships that cany it are English. As Professor Laughton puts it, “ it is difficult to picture the consternation in the City on hearing of the loss of some steamer bringing homeward a rich freight of diamonds from the Cape, or of gold from Australia. But, as we clung steadfastly to the right of making prize of the Spanish plate-ships, it is not to be expected that any enemy which fate will now send us will waive his claim to the English steamers, if only he has the power to assert it” So the question still remains, How can we best protect a merchant ship or fleet of merchantmen from attack on the high seas ?
In the dawn of Western navigation, every ship was in turn a merchant ship, pirate, or a man-of-war, just as it suited her purpose. She carried her own cargo, she was ready, when the chance offered, to pounce on a weaker vessel, without much regard to nationality, and she fought for the king whenever his Majesty was pleased to levy a fleet But by degrees these branches of the business were
Digitized by GOOQle
334
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
specialised, as in the trades on shore. It was found that a ship specially fitted for war had an advantage over one that carried both arms and cargo, and that defence by a ship of war was not only more effectual, but cheaper, than by an armed merchantman. Very soon, therefore, the small merchant ships, especially in the North Seas, took to sailing in company under the protection of one or more ships of war.
In the sixteenth century this business of escort was called “ wafting,” and the small ships of war engaged in it were called “ waiters.” But bigger ships, bound on longer voyages, were not wafted; they carried arms and did their own fighting, if need were. Hawkyns, for instance, and other Elizabethan adventurers, made their trade at the point of the sword, and contrived to blend the two professions very happily. In the next century, however, our ships trading in the Mediterranean regularly carried an escort; the Smyrna fleet and the Levant fleet were institutions; and though the merchant vessels were expected to defend themselves if attacked, they had always the men-of-war in support. The Dutch followed the same system, protecting their Levant trade with so fine an array of armed ships that more than one English squadron, attacking in force, was beaten off without any conspicuous success. .
But our most important failure with the Dutch Mediterranean trade befell us in November, 1652. In that month our hero Blake had no less than 300 Dutch merchantmen shut up in the Texel, and there he had kept them all the summer and autumn. Matters were so serious that the Dutch Government called upon their old Admiral Tromp, who undertook with seventy ships of war to see them on their way. He was burning for a return match with Blake, and setting to work in a way that showed he meant business, sailed with his whole fleet to the Downs, where he caught Blake napping, and inflicted on him a nasty defeat. Blake had to withdraw for a while, and shut himself up in the Thames. Thereupon Tromp ordered out his crowd of merchantmen, and lay by the French coast with his men-of-war till every’ ship was clear, when he followed quietly down Channel as a rearguard. It was a beautiful plan beautifully carried out by one of the greatest commanders England has ever had to encounter on the sea. .
The history of our experiences with convoy, indeed, is very far from being uniformly cheerful It includes, for instance, the great capture of our Mediterranean trade, in 1693, under the escort of Sir George Rooke, the capture of the East and West Indian trade, under the escort of Captain Montray in 1780; and the capture, in the following year, of the St. Eustatius booty as it was being brought home under the escort of two ships of the line and three frigates, commanded by Captain Hotham, The loss to England over these three affairs can have been of little less than three millions of money, and in each case the disaster was brought about, not by lack of British courage, but simply7 because the escort in each case was lamentably insufficient. It is obviously much better to leave merchant ships to make their way across the sea alone, and at their own risk, than to gather a number of wealthy ships into a crowd, which invites the enemy's attack, and then
Digitized by^OOQlC
THE NIGHTINGALE FRIGATE.
335
leave them inadequately protected. Once or twice, indeed, it has happened, that an English escort has saved her convoy by the heroic measure of sacrificing herself. A case in point is the plucky defence of the Night ingale frigate by Captain Seth Jenny in 1707.
Captain Seth Jenny, as gallant a hero as ever trod the quarter-deck, was a little man of about five feet in height, with a humped back and a wry neck. He was sailing across from the Texel, with a convoy of thirty-six merchantmen in good order behind him, when he spied six French galleys between him and the mouth of the Thames. These galleys were narrow craft, ranging from 120 to 150 feet long, and from 18 feet to 20 feet by the beam. They were rowed by slaves, and the number of men they carried was prodigious. The leading galley alone, that of M. de Langeron, was manned by over 300 slaves and 150 men of all sorts, either officers, soldiers, or servants. The prow of each galley was of iron, pointed like a peak, and so sharp that, when rowed at full speed against a hostile ship, it was like to sink her, or at least to drive deep and hold on while the boarders poured up and over her sides. Besides this formidable weapon, each galley carried four guns forward, and a heavier piece which was worked on a circular platform amidships.
Captain Jenny saw these ugly craft ahead, and knew that the chances against him were at least a hundred to one. The galleys had started for a descent upon the English coast, but were easily diverted by the sight of this richer prey. Commodore Langeron gave orders to four of his captains to intercept and capture the merchantmen, while his own galley and that of the Chevalier Mauvilliers attacked and overpowered tho frigate. The Englishman understood the plan of attack at once: had, in fact, anticipated it. He had one hope, and that a slight one—to save the convoy by losing the frigate.
He signalled the merchantmen to crowd all sail for the Thames. He himself sailed quietly along beside them for some thirty minutes, quite as if unaware of any danger; then shifted his helm, and bore down straight in the teeth of the French.
It was a gallant stroke, and a subtle, too—as M. de Langeron began to understand very soon. To begin with, the Commodore’s galley (which was very swift) had outstripped that of the Chevalier Mauvilliers by something like a league, and the frigate was, therefore, taking her alone. Still, he had no doubt of being more than a match for the Nightingale.
Down sailed the Nightingale closer and closer, with her English flag flying gady. “id on rushed the galley, driven by the 300 sweating slaves in her hold. As soon as the two vessels were within range, M. de Langeron sent a shot to meet her from one of the four guns forward, then waited for the Englishman’s reply. The frigate made none, but held silently on her course.
Digitized by^OOQlC
336
THE STORY OE THE SEA.
For a moment the French Commodore jumped to a fresh conclusion— that the Englishman meant to strike his colours without a blow. But the minutes passed: the galley had discharged all her forward guns, and the two vessels were within musket shot; and still the English flag flew and the English frigate held on.
Then, suddenly, when in two or three minutes the vessels must have collided, round went the Nightingale’s wheel: the frigate fetched up stock-
A UM IKAI. Bl AMI.
(From the Paisfiup in (?rmiWM^ Hospital.)
still, shivering against the wind, and was off on the starboard tack, apparently in full flight
Her unaccountable behaviour staggered the Frenchman a little, but nothing gives more spirit than a flymg enemy, and for a minute or two the boasting and laughter was loud on board the galley. Especially foolish, it seemed, to expose her stern, which galleys usually choose to attack, as being the weakest point. M. de Langeron had made his dispositions for victory. The helmsman was ordered to drive straight ahead and impale the Nightingale's stern, and the crew, after one discharge of cannon, were to board at once. The men stood ready with hatchets
and cutlasses, and set up a cheer as they came close.
But they reckoned without British seamanship. The beak was close— was on the point of striking—when the frigate jammed her helm hard down; her stern swung sharply round; and, instead of dashing into it, the Frenchman drove past, missing it by a yard or so, crumpling up her starboard oars like paper, tearing great splinters out of the Nightingale’s flank. Then Captain Jenny whipped out his grappling-irons, and brought her up helpless, strained to the frigate’s side, and right under her guns. The fire that opened then was murderous. A minute before, the galley had thought the frigate at her mercy; now, she lay with her crowd on deck, as much exposed as if she were a raft. Her consort was a league behind; the other four galleys were off chasing the merchantmen. For five
Digitized by LnOOQle
CAPTAIN JERMY AND THE FRENCH GALLEYS.
337
minutes Captain Jenny poured his grape shot and canister among the huddled crowd. Then he gave the order to board. Forty or fifty English’ men dropped into the galley, and were only driven back by weight of numbers. Their repulse did the Frenchman no good. Instantly, the frigate opened fire again, and killed his men by si'ores.
It was in this extremity that the Commodore looked around, and found himself forced to do that which Captain Jermy from the first had meant him to do. The four galleys sent in pursuit of the convoy were, by this time, sweeping along on the full tide of success. In another five minutes all hope of escape would be gone, the path-
SIH GEOROE KOQK&
(From 1/ti Fauiftny &y D«AWJ
way to the Thames would be blocked, and all the merchant vessels at their mercy.
M. de Langeron hoisted the flag of distress. He called them back to his help. The four galleys saw it, and turned back sullenly enough. But a great cheer went up from the crew of the frigate. The order meant
IN THE DOWNS.
(From a XfratrtAp by IF. L. Jf^ic, JJtX)
22
Digitized by
Google
338
THE STOEY OE THE SEA
their destruction—for how could one frigate contend against six galleys ?— but they had saved the merchant fleet. It was not until little Captain Barker, from his cabin window, had seen the last sail safe within the Thames that he stepped on the deck of his frigate, now occupied by Frenchmen, and surrounded by all the six galleys, and tendered his sword to M. de Langeron. "Take it back, sir,” said the French Commodore. " Take back a weapon no man better deserves to wear.”
A cause of loss far more frequent than inadequacy of escort was the ill-behaviour of the merchant vessels themselves. Their masters were bound by the terms of their insurance, as well as by the orders of their owners and the Admiralty, to give strict obedience to the commands of the officer in charge of the escort; but, as a matter of fact, disobedience was the rule, and it was quite a common thing to see a line of merchantmen straggling to windward of the frigate supposed to protect them. For instance, on the 11th of May, 1745, the celebrated privateersman George Walker, then commanding the King George and two other vessels, spied a large fleet to windward. Drawing near, he made them out to be merchantmen under the convoy of several strong ships, which, however, were all to leeward. Walker saw the opportunity for a line hard, and bore down, when, to his disappointment, the ships turned out to be English, outward bound for Newfoundland and the West Indies, with the Milford and Kye, ships of war. Walker went on board the Kye, and pointed out to her commanding ■officer, Captain Craven, that, had he been a Frenchman, he could have made any number of prizes, and carried them off under the very nose of the escort. “ True, sir,” said the captain, “ and what censure would have fallen on His Majesty's officers ■ And yet, let me do all I can, these masters of common vessels who sail better than the rest will keep to windward; for, as to firing at them, I have done it till I am tired, and may fire away every shot in the ship.” The Navy, in fact, was always bemoaning the selfish indifference of the merchant captains it had to protect. It is related of old Sir John Jervis (afterwards Lord St. Vincent) that, in the year 1794, when he was co-operating with Sir Charles Grey in the West Indies, a question arose about the procedure of a convoy to Europe. Sir John wished to consult the different masters. A signal was made to this effect, and the masters attended on board the Admiral’s ship. He stated his reasons for convening them, and desired to hear their opinions. Finding that each delivered his sentiments with a single eye to his own interest, he tried to persuade them of the expedience of consulting for their common welfare, but without effect. At last he lost his temper, and, hastily stumping to and fro on deck, began to snap his fingers and sing, with a voice of no common strength, “ Sing tantarara! rogues all, rogues all I ” and repeated it with such vehemence that the merchant
Digitized by Goode
BAD CONVOY AND SOME EICH HAULS.
339
captains bustled over the ship’s side in terror lest they should be kicked over the bulwarks. The Admiral dispatched the convoy on bis own plan.
Of course, the history of our own Navy is full of rich hauls, made by attacking foreign convoys and single ships. There was the Hermione, for instance, a Spanish register ship, captured off Cape St. Vincent on May 21st, 1762, by three English frigates. (Another Hermione, a Frenchman this time, had fallen into the hands of one of our most gallant privateersmen, Fortunatus Wright, in 1747 ; and the history of yet a third, which will be told in its place, is one of the most extraordinary in the annals of the Navy.) The Hermione now in question was homeward bound from Lima, with a cargo which is said to have amounted to near twelve millions of money registered; a considerable amount of unregistered money; besides, 2,000 serons of cocoa, and a great deal of other valuable merchandise' The ordinary seaman got little less than £300 for his share of the prize-money; while, as for the officers, they might each buy a large estate at once, and set up as country gentlemen.
In the following year the value of prize goods taken at the Havannah alone amounted to £154,855 10s. lid., of which the Admiral took nearly £90,000, the Commodore £17,206, the Captains £1,125 each, and the Lieutenants £86 1a each.
Pass on to the year 1799, on. the 16th and 17 th of that October, four of our frigates, cruising somewhere off Cape Finisterre, had the luck to pick up two Spaniards, the Thetis and Santa Brigida, containing between them four millions and a half of dollars, besides valuable cargoes of merchandise. James, indeed, asserts that out of the prize-money the four English captains picked up something like £50,000 each, while even the seamen and marines were passingly enriched with £182 4s. 9LL a head; but this is incredible. On tho 21st and 22nd the prizes arrived at Plymouth, and on the 29th a mighty procession escorted the Spanish gold through Stonehouse and Plymouth to the dungeons of the citadel. First came a trumpeter of the Surrey regiment of dragoons, sounding a charge; then followed artillerymen and dragoons, the latter riding two and two with sabres drawn; then a fife and drum band playing “Rule, Britannia” and “God Save the King;” then sixty-three artillery waggons—think of it!—all laden with dollars; nine divisions of seven waggons each. On the first waggon stood a seaman, carrying the British over the Spanish jack, and two officers of marines, armed; on the centre waggon a seaman carrying the British over the Spanish ensign, midshipmen armed with cutlasses; on the hindmost waggon a seaman flying the British over the Spanish pendant. Followed mariners and seamen, two and two; another band playing “ Britons’, Strike Home I ”; an artillery officer, two officers of marines, and more Surrey dragoons. Two trumpeters sounding a charge closed the procession, which was flanked right and left by armed seamen and midshipmen, and accompanied by the cheers of Plymothians, “ who testified their satisfaction by repeated hurrahs at seeing so much treasure, once the property of the enemy of Old England, soon to be in the pockets of her jolly tars and marines.” Sailors were
Digitized byVrOOQlC
340
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
popular then in Plymouth, and highly privileged. An old maiden lady, a Quakeress, was stopped by one in the street, who said, “ Excuse me, ma’am, but I've sworn to give you a kiss, and I must do it.” She said, “ Thee must be quick about it, then;” and he kissed her.
But the most renowned of captures is probably Anson’s affair with the Acapulco galleon, Nuestra Seflora del Cuba Donga, in 1742. All the romance of the buccaneering period hangs around these famous treasure-ships, the annual ship from Manila to Acapulco, and the annual ship from Acapulco to Manila. The former was usually the object of attack, being laden so heavily with bulky goods, China silks, Indian stuffs and embroideries, and so on, that, for lack of room, she had to dismount many of her guns and sail with a smaller crew. She was not so rich as her sister, but her cargo was worth three millions of dollars. On the other hand, the ship from Acapulco chiefly carried silver and gold. She had, therefore more room, and before she left port her lower tier was mounted and some companies of soldiers added to the crew, making in all about 600 men. The treasure-ship usually took six months or so to crawl across the Pacific. Nevertheless, although every free-lance on the ocean dreamed of capturing her, and though a good many made the attempt, she was only taken three times—by Candish in 1587, by Rogers in 1709, and by Anson in 1742. ■
Anson’s ship, the Centurion, had sailed from England in September, 1740, with as hopeless a crew as was ever selected for their work, even by a British Government ; which is saying much. The place of able seamen and marines was filled by invalids discharged from hospital, old Chelsea pensioners, tottering sexagenarians, and soldiers who hud never let off a gun in their lives. All the sailors who had vigour enough to walk out of Portsmouth deserted before starting, and Anson was left with those who had found themselves unable to take even this easy exercise. Of these, when on the 19th of April, 1742, the Centurion sailed out of Macao in quest of the Acapulco ship, great numbers were dead, the greenhorns from exposure to the climate, the more seasoned veterans of senile decay. Her crew, however, had been reinforced by twenty-three Lascars and Dutchmen. But the ship was foul with long keeping the sea; there were many sick on board, and the westerly monsoon had set in. Nevertheless Anson was confident. He guessed that, instead of the one annual ship from Acapulco, there would be two this year, since by his cruising off that port he had prevented the usual ship from sailing the year before. He determined to lay off Cape Espirito Santo and wait, and on May 20th at noon discovered that cape about eleven leagues distant. From that day until the 20th of June they cruised gently on and off, and kept a strict lookout. At length, at sunrise on the 20th they discovered a sail from the masthead in the S.E. quarter. “ On this a general joy spread through the whole ship,” for they had no doubt that this was one of the galleons, and they expected to sight the other very soon. Anson instantly stood towards her, and shortly before dusk they were near enough to see her from the Centurion’s deck The galleon fired a gun (which was taken by the English to be a signal to her
Digitized by LnOOQle
“ ALL LADEX WITH DOLLARS” (p. 339)
Digitized by^OOQlC
342
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
consort), and took in her topgallant sails, but held on her course. About noon on the 21st the two ships being then about a league distant, she brought to under topsails, with her head to the northward, hoisting Spanish colours and having the standard of Spain flying at her topgallant masthead. Anson was ready for her. He had picked out about thirty of his best marksmen, and distributed them among the tops. “ As he had not hands enough remaining to quarter a sufficient number to each great gun in the customary manner, he therefore on his lower tier fixed only two men to each gun, who were to bo solely employed in loading it, while the rest of his people were divided into different gangs of ten or twelve men each, who were continually moving about the decks, to run out aud fire such guns as were loaded. By this management he was enabled to make use of all his guns, and, instead of whole broadsides with intervals between them, he kept up a constant fire without intermission; whence he doubted not to procure very signal advantages. For it is common with the Spaniards to fall down upon the decks when they sec a broadside preparing, and to continue in that posture till it is given; after which they rise again, and, presuming the danger to be for some time over, work their guns and fire with great briskness till another broadside is ready; but the firing gun by gun, in the manner directed by the Commodore, rendered this practice of theirs impossible.”
About noon several squalls of wind and rain obscured the galleon from their sight; but, whenever it cleared up, they observed her resolutely lying to. Towards one o’clock the Centurion hoisted her colours, the enemy being within gunshot The Spaniards, who had hitherto neglected to clear their decks, were now seen to be throwing overboard cattle and lumber, at which work Anson began to worry them with his chase-guns. The galleon made answer with two of her stern-chasers, and “the Centurion getting her spritsail yard fore and aft, that, if necessary, she might be ready for boarding, the Spaniards, in a bravado, rigged their spritsail yard fore and aft likewise.” Soon after, the Centurion drew up within pistol-shot, keeping to leeward of the Spaniard, that she might have no chance of putting before the wind, and running for the port of Jalapay, about seven leagues distant.
And now the engagement began in earnest. For half an hour, Anson had considerably the better of it, having contrived to lay his ship on the galleon’s bow, where the width of his ports allowed him to bring all his guns to bear upon the Spaniard’s, while all but a few of hers were useless. Almost at once, some of the Centurion’s wads set fire to the mats with which the galleon had stuffed her netting, and, for a minute or two, the flames reached half-way to her mizzen-top. This disturbed Anson hardly less than it did the enemy, for he feared lest the treasure-ship should be burnt; and, besides this, there was the chance that she might drift on board the Centurion, and burn her, too. However, the Spaniards at last
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE ACAPULCO GALLEON.
343
managed to cut away the netting and tumble the whole blazing mass into the sea.
So far, the Centurion had plied her guns briskly, and with precision, while her topmen swept the galleon’s decks with their small arms, killing or wounding every officer but one on the quarter-deck, and wounding in particular the general of tho galleon, Don Geronimo Montero, a Portuguese, with a reputation for great skill and courage. But now she lost her superior position, and the two ships for nearly an hour lay side to side; yet, even in this posture, tho Commodore’s grape-shot swept the Spaniard’s decks with cruel precision, insomuch that very soon the Spanish officers were seen running about hither and thither, vainly endeavouring to keep the disheartened men at their posts. They made a Inst effort, pointed and fired five or six guns with better aim than usual, and then gave up the contest. The galleon’s colours had been singed off the ensign’s staff’ at the beginning of the engagement, so she had to haul down the standard from her main top-gallant masthead ; “ the person who was employed to perform this office having been in imminent peril of being killed, had not the Commodore, who perceived what he was about, given express orders to his people to desist from firing.” But no sooner had she struck than a lieutenant camo running to Anson, and whispered that the Centurion was dangerously on fire near the powder-room. Anson, in the calmest possible voice, gave orders for extinguishing it, which, happily, was effected in a short time. But the incident was alarming enough, for the galleon had fallen on board the Centurion on the starboard quarter, and, had the powder ignited, must infallibly have perished with her.
Thus, the great Acapulco ship became Anson’s prize ; and she was, indeed, a prize. She had on board 35,682 ounces of virgin silver, 1,313,843 pieces of eight* besides some cochineal and other trifles, which hardly counted. She was a much larger vessel than the Centurion, and carried 550 men and 36 large guns, mostly 12-pounders, besides 28 petereroes along her rails, quarters, and tops, each shooting 4-pound balls. She was well-furnished with small arms, and fitted. with a strong network of two-inch rope, fortified with pikes, set in the manner of chevaux de fries, to keep off boarders. Nevertheless, she had sixty-seven men killed and eighty-four wounded, whilst the little Centurion had but two men killed and seventeen wounded, all but one of whom recovered. •
This is, perhaps, the most famous windfall in the history of the Navy; though that history is full enough of captures and prize-money, from the time when Drake, in the Golden Hinde, shot overboard the mast of the
• Pieces of eight was the name then commonly given to the Spanish “pillar dollars" of tho value of eight reals, or about four shillings and fourpenee. The pillar dollar wu so called from the coin having upoa it two pillars, standing for the Pillars of Hercules, as the rocky points at the extreme west of the Mediterranean were called.
Digitized by
Google
344
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
Cacafuego, and possessed himself of gold and silver in coin and bars, jewels and precious stones, amounting to 300,000 pieces of gold. It was over prize-money that Rodney and Arbuthnot quarrelled in 1780. Lord Howe, after the “ Glorious First of June,” was roundly blamed by many for giving his attention to securing the prizes, while he might have been making the victory more decisive. The same thing was said of Sir John
"KINSINO ABOUT HtTHBX ASO THITHBk” (p 3l3p
Jervis after the battle of St. Vincent; and, over prize-money, even two such heroes as Lord St. Vincent and Nelson managed to squabble, and engaged each other in a lawsuit. Half the bitterness that occurred was due to the scandalously disproportionate share which went to the senior officers. When an Admiral takes £4,000 and a poor seaman but £2, it is easy to see that talk about prize-money as encouraging seamen to do their duty was rather idle, especially at times when magnificent hauls were constantly being made by privateers.
For, rich as were the captures occasionally made by His Majesty’s ships, it was the privateer who really had the chance of amassing a fortune on the sea. The reports—authentic reports—of his captures are endless, train the days of Drake and Hawkyns to the beginning of this century.
Digitized by LnOOQle
CAPTURES by privateers.
345
LORD HOWE (From a PriM.)
“ Letters from Fowey state the arrival there of the Lord Middleion, richly laden with cocoa, indigo, coffee, quicksilver, valued at £45,000, taken by the Maria privateer of this port." Or, “Came in the Earl St, Vincent, fourteen guns, Captain Richards, privateer, of this port, with the New Harmony of Altona, from Smyrna to Amsterdam, with cargo valued at £80,000.” Or, “ Came in the Amazon, of Liverpool, and Ranger, of Bristol, with a ship captured off the Azores. She is deeply laden with gold, silver, silk, coffee, china, cochineal, and indigo, and also great private adventures not registered.’’ The value of the whole is supposed to exceed £300,000”—and so on.
Anson’s expedition was fitted years before Anson took the Nuestra	Seri ora	del Cuba
Donga, Woodes Rogers, a Bristol privateer, had shown him the way to capture an Acapulco galleon. Rogers—as cool and able a seaman as ever trod the quarter-deck—-weighed from King Road, Bristol, on August 2nd, 1708, with two frigates, the Duke and Duchess, of a tonnage which many a modern pleasure yacht would exceed; the Duke being 320 tons, with thirty guns and 117 men, and the Duchess, but 260 tons, with twenty-six guns and 108 men. After many adventures, we find them, in the late autumn of 1709, cruising off Cape St. Lucas, waiting and watching for the “ Manila ship.” It was a weary watch
out by Government, but more than thirty
LOKU BUDKIT.
(From tie faiAtintf by Sir Joshua Reynolds.}
Digitized by Tooele
346
THE STOEY OF THE SEA.
and we hear of one of the crew being ordered into irons “ for wishing himself a pirate, or that an enemy was alongside who could overpower ns ”— a wish (says Mr. R. C. Leslie, his latest editor), which must have appeared even more atrocious to Captain Rogers than did that of Mr. Squeers' pupil, ** the j uniorest Palmer,” who, after first “ wishing he was in Heaven,” went on to ” wish he was a donkey, because then ho wouldn’t have a father as didn’t love him.” But at length, at 9 a.m. on the 21st of December, just as their provisions were running cruelly short, a man at the masthead of the Duke cried out that he saw another sail as well as the Duchess, which, as the day drew on, proved to be the long-expected Acapulco ship. The weather had fallen calm, which (says Rogers) 11 kept them all in a very uncertain, languishing condition,” and chose had to be waited on through the night by a couple of pinnaces " showing false fires, that we might know whereabouts they and the chase was.”
Still the calm continued, until, just before daybreak on the 23rd, being still without wind, Rogers says, “ we got out eight of our ship’s oars, and rowed above an hour, when there sprang up a small breeze, upon which I ordered a large kettle of chocolate to be made for our ship’s company (having no spiritous liquor to give them), and then went to prayers, but before we had concluded were disturbed by the enemy firing at us. She had barrels hanging at each yard-arm, which looked like powder-barrels to deter us from boarding. Tho Duchess being to leeward, with little wind, did not come up; and, the enemy firing her stern-chase several times, we returned it with our fore-chase, till, getting close aboard, we gave her several broadsides, plying our small arms briskly, which they returned as thick for awhile, but did not ply their guns so fast as we. After a little while, shooting ahead of them, we lay athwart their hawse, close aboard, and ply’d them so warmly that she soon struck her colours two-thirds down, and the Duchess, coming up, fired five guns and a volley of small shot, to which she made no reply, having submitted. This galleon was,” says Rogers, “ called by the long name of Nostra Signiora de la Incarnation Desengano, Sir John Pinchberty, Commander; she had twenty guns, with twenty patereroes, and 193 men, whereof nine were killed, ten wounded, and several blown up and burnt with powder. We engaged them about three glasses ” (an hour and a half), “ in which time we had only myself and another wounded, I being shot through the left cheek, the bullet striking away great part of my upper jaw, and several teeth, which dropt down on the deck where I fell. The other was an Irish landsman, slightly wounded. A shot disabled our mizenmast, and I was forced to write what I would say to prevent the loss of blood, and because of the pain I suffered by speaking.”
Rogers’ wound was a serious one. On the 24th he writes: “ In the night I felt something clog my throat, which I swallowed wuth much pain, and suppose it was part of my jaw-bone or the shot, which we can’t yet give account of.” But this did not prevent him from getting under way with
Digitized by LnOOQle
WOODES BOGERS TAKES THE MANILA SHIR
347
alacrity on the 26 th, when he found that the second galleon had come up and was engaged with his consorts, the Duchess and the little Mart]wins. The second galleon, however, was a brave new ship, the Bigwonia, of 900 tons, and sixty guns, and well provided against boarders. The English fought her for six or seven hours, and put no less than 500 shot into her, without much eftect. She, on the other hand, managed to place a fire-ball on the Duke's quarter-deck, which blew up an ammunition chest; while Bogers was wounded by a splinter in the left foot, “ part of my heel-bone being struck out and ankle cut above half through, which bled very much before it could be dressed, and weakened me so that I could not stand, but lay on my back in great misery.” The Duke's mainmast, too, was tottering; so a council of war was held and they determined to let the galley go during the night and return to Port Segura, and look after the prize already taken.
At first it seems amazing that little ships such as the Duke and Centurion should worst these great galleons of almost double their tonnage, and more than double their number of men. But, pleasant as it is to believe every Englishman a match for two Spaniards, we must remember that in each case the issue turned upon gunnery, and the English had the greater weight of metal. Remembering this, we can understand Anson's surprise that the Nuest ra Sei tor a del Cuba Donga did not run away at the sight of him. The Spaniards, at any rate, knew the extent of their disadvantage, and often, in fitting out a rich ship, resorted to some queer stratagems to conceal her wealth in case an enemy paid her a visit. Shelvocke, for instance, in the Recovery, took a Spanish prize in which were found a quantity of sweetmeats, which were distributed among the messes. One day a seaman came grumbling that “he couldn’t do nothing with this here box of marmalade; couldn't stick his knife into it; would like another in its place, please.” Shelvocke opened out, and found inside a cake of virgin silver, which, “ being very porous, it was of near the same weight of so much inalmalade.” They overhauled the rest of the sweetmeats, and fount! five more of these boxes. The old seaman gets quite dismal when he thinks of the number of these boxes he left behind in the prize, and laments that this deceit had served the Spaniards in a double capacity—to defraud their King’s officers and blind their enemies.
But, on the whole, England has probably lost more than she has gained at the hands of privateers. She had her Fortunatus Wright and George Walker, and many other gallant privateersmen, but never seemed able to make effective use of them. Our Navy has tended more and more to become a close corporation, excluding all genius and energy except that which itself has cultivated. The French, on the other hand, have not snubbed their privateers, but encouraged and directed them; with the result that she owes to privateering not only such heroes as Jean Bart, Thurot, and Surcouf, but even her incomparable Du Guay-Trouin, whose memory is still worshipped in France as we
Digitized byVrOOQlC
348
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
worship no other seaman’s but Nelson’s only. And, even in the present day, the ordinary run of French fishermen are probably far better practical sailors than the mass of English fishermen, for the simple reason that every French marin, whether fisherman or employed on board a coaster or merchant vessel, is held to belong to the French Navy until he is forty years old, and is liable to be called upon to serve on board a man-of-war should he be wanted. Every Frenchman, when he reaches the age of eighteen, is bound to serve his country, either as a soldier or a sailor. Should he prefer the sea, he must serve for three years. At first he is sent to one of the great naval ports, such as Cherbourg or Toulon, and trained in the Caserne, or naval barracks, for a period of six months. Then follows six months of harbour service or the like, and then he is sent abroad, or wherever men are wanted. Of course, when his three years are up, he may stick to the Navy, if he chooses; if not, he is free to return home—always with the proviso that, until he is forty years old, he may be called upon to serve, if wanted.
It was this national encouragement that made the French fishermen such splendid privateersmen during the great war. The number of privateers fitted out in the port of Boulogne alone between the month of September, 1795, and May, 1800, was 154. These vessels—chawe-maries and luggers, for the most part—were manned by 5,800 men, an average of nearly forty men to a boat. They captured from the English 202 prizes, valued at £51,737 sterling; and they took as prisoners 1,967 Englishmen. Of these privateers, sixteen only were taken by the English ships, and only 755 of the men were either killed or taken prisoners: pretty good work for ordinary fishermen I
But the great names in the story of French privateering belong to an earlier date. The stories that have grown up about them are to a great extent fabulous; still, enough of truth remains to force us to pay homage to those very capable foes of ours. There was Jean Bart, for instance, a native of Dunkirk, and, therefore, a subject of France by birth, though by blood a Dutchman. He was born in 1650, of poor and not conspicuously honest parents; at least, his father, and his grandfather before him, had been privateers in time of war, and smugglers in time of peace. Bart, at any rate, was fond of the profession. After the peace of 1678, when he was offered a commission as lieutenant in the Navy, for which he was not eager, it was urged that he would probably be a captain in a year’s time. “ I am a captain already,” he answered. " Of a King’s ship ? '* “ Of a Dunkirk privateer,” was the proud reply. It is told of Bart that once, whilst he was engaged with a Dutch privateer, his son Cornil, a boy of ten, gave signs of being afraid. This so enraged Bart that, with his own hands, he bound the child to the mainmast, and kept him there while the fight lasted, choosing to expose his son to the greatest danger rather than allow him to survive as a coward. Whatever agonies the child endured, the treatment seems to have been effectual, if we may believe another story which we may here relate. About ten years later.
Digitized by GOOQle
JEAN BART.
349
in September, 1697, when Bart was conveying the Prince de Conti, a candidate for the crown of Poland, to Dantzic, it is said that his little squadron was chased by the Anglo-Dutch fleet. The chase lasted for eight hours—from 7 a.m. to 3 p.m.—at the end of which time the enemy was left out of sight Bart
“ WK LAY ATHWAHT TH1HB HAWSE ” (p. 310X
^en went down to the cabin, where the Prince, suspecting nothing of the ^ger — though it had lasted over breakfast and dinner time—was quietly sitting
Mionseigneur has had a narrow escape.”
* What do you mean ? ” asked the Prince.
* Why, we have been chased by three eighty-gun ships and nine frigates.
8 Kay® run them out of sight, and there is nothing more to fear.”
-Diable / Monsieur Bart; but suppose they had taken us ? ”
Digitized by LnOOQle
350
THE STOGY OF THE SEA.
“Oh, Monseigneur, but that was quite impossible.”
“ Eh! what ? Why impossible ? ”
“ Because I took the precaution to station my son Cornii in the gun-room with a lighted match and strict orders to put it into the powder if we should be overpowered.”
“ Good heavens! ” cried the Prince, " you would never have done such a thing! ”
“But I certainly should. It shall never be said that 1 let you be taken when His Majesty gave me strict orders to take care you were not taken,"
These, and many similar stories, are almost certainly fabulous. But the tale of Bart’s escape from Plymouth is authentic enough. It happened, in May, 1G89, that Bart, in the Railleuse frigate, of twenty-four guns, with the Chevalier Forbin, in the Serpents frigate, as his subordinate, was convoying a fleet of some twenty merchant vessels to Brest. Off the Casquets they fell in with the Nonsuch, of forty-eight guns, commanded by Captain Roomccoyle. The merchantmen took to their heels, and the Railleuse and the Serpente were taken after a stout fight, in which the captain and master of the Nonsuch were killed, the command devolving upon the boatswain, Robert Lincock, who took the prizes into Plymouth, and was soon after made a captain for his exploit, Bart and Forbin were cast into prison; but, as luck would have it, a kinsman of Bart’s, commanding an Ostend vessel—probably a small privateer—put into Plymouth, heard of their fate, and obtained leave to visit the prisoners. He was easily persuaded to help them in a plan of escape, and promised to have a boat ready, with provisions and a compass. A Flemish surgeon, who had been allowed to visit them, got them a file. They filed away the bars of their window, twisted their sheets into a rope, and slid down. The boat was waiting; they jumped in and pushed off In going out through the Sound, they had to pass near a man-of-war, from the deck of which they were hailed. Bart, who knew a very little English, shouted back, " Fishing-boat! ” and so they got clear out to sea. The weather was fine, though foggy, and, after a passage of nearly forty-eight hours, they made the coast of Brittany, near St Malo. Bart had rowed the whole time without resting, except to snatch a mouthful of food.
But perhaps Bart’s finest performance was in 1696, when he kept the redoubtable Benbow trotting after him in vain throughout a weary summer. In the May of that year it became known in England that Bart was getting ready to sail from Dunkirk with a squadron of nine ships. On receipt of this news, the port of Dunkirk was closely blockaded by a large force, English and Dutch, with Rear-Admiral Benbow in command. Benbow, in his boat, rowed almost into the harbour, found the enemy ready for sea, and judged, from the wind and tide, that they meant to slip out by
Digitized byVrOOQlC
DU GUAY-TROUIN.
351
the north passage. He took his measures accordingly. The next day brought a thick haze, and when the fog lifted on the following morning, Bart and his ships were not to be seen. He bad slipped out through the east passage. By the middle of June, he was busy on the Dogger Bank, where he fell in with a fleet of seventy Dutch merchantmen, under the convoy of flve small ships of war. These last he captured and burnt, and dispersed the convoy, taking thirty of them, Benbow went in pursuit, and spent the summer at it; but he never even set eyes upon Bart until the middle of September, and then only at a distance, and when a chase was idle. When weary of the game, the Frenchman quietly returned into Dunkirk and laid up for the winter. Not many men could treat Benbow thus.
But a far greater than Bart was Rene. Du Guay-Trouin, who also began as a privateer, and inflicted more humiliation on our arms than any French seaman before or since. One- exploit alone of his can be told here. On the 21st of October, 1707, Du Guay-Trouin, on board L’Achille, with Le Jason (commanded by our old friend, the Chevalier de Forbin), and another line-of-bat tie ship, cruising in the Channel, fell in with a large convoy of English vessels ofi' the Lizard, escorted by five ships of the line—the Cumberland (eighty guns), the Devonshire (eighty), the Royal Oak (seventy-four), the Ruby (fifty), and the Chester (fifty).
Du Guay-Trouin promptly attacked the Cumberland, and forced her, after a sharp fight, to haul down her colours. He then engaged the Devonshire, a ship that held no less than 1,100 men. After an hour of desperate fighting, L’Achille had more than 300 of her men placed hors de combat. Nevertheless, her captain laid his vessel alongside the Devonshire in order to board, when, all at once, clouds of smoke were seen pouring from tlie stern of the English line-of-battle ship. The flames quickly spread to her masts and sails, and, in less than half an hour, the Devonshire was ablaze from stem to stern. Of the whole 1,100 men on board, only three sailors were saved. Meanwhile, the Chevalier de Forbin, with Le Jason and her comrade, engaged the Chester, the Ruby, and the Royal Oak. The Chester and the Ruby soon struck, and only one out of the five English ships, the Royal Oak, escaped. Sixty ships of the English convoy were taken by the conquerors. The Frenchmen laughed at the pretensions of the English upon the sea, and, as they led their numerous English prisoners into Brest called out, ironically, “ Make way, please, for the masters of the sea! ” The colours taken from the English in this fight still hang within the walls of the cathedral of Notre Dame in Paris.
But we must leave the French privateers for a while, and come to a very celebrated name in the history of privateering—none other than Paul Jones, falsely called " the pirate,” He was not a pirate in any true sense of the word, but a privateer employed by the Colonies in their revolt against their mother country.
Digitized by Tooele
352
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
John Paul—for that was his real name—was born on the estate of Lord Selkirk, near Kirkcudbright, in 1747, his father being head gardener. The elder Paul seems to have had a sense of humour. In the gardens were two summer-houses, exactly alike in size and build. One day. Lord Selkirk, while strolling about the walks, observed a youth locked up in one of the summer-houses, and looking out of the window. In the other house young Paul appeared, looking out of the corresponding window. His lordship inquired why the boys were under lock and key. “ My lord, I
“ CONVOYING X TLBBT ’’ (p 350).
caught the rascal stealing your lordship's fruit." “ But there are two of them, What has your son done ? Is he also guilty ? ” “ 'Deed no, my lord," replied old Paul, “ I just put him in for the sake of symmetry! ”
At the age of twelve, John Paul was bound apprentice on board a trading ship, the Friendship, of Whitehaven; but, after he had made a few voyages in her, his employer failed, and he obtained a berth as third mate on board the King George, of the same port, a slaver. At the age of nineteen, we find him appointed first mate of the Two Friends, of Jamaica, also a slaver. At the end of two years he left her—“ impelled,” says one of his biographers, “ by an irresistible feeling of disgust at the cruelties and horrors with which the trade was attended." More probably, he was huffed with his skipper. At any rate, he came home, as passenger, in a brigantine, the John, of Kirkcudbright; and, the master and mate both dying on the voyage, took the command and brought her safely home. The owners, in gratitude, appointed him master of the John, and in her he made two voyages to the West Indies, after which he seems to have been employed in smuggling between the Isle of Man and the Solway Frith. In 1773 a brother in
Digitized by Tooele
PAUL JONE&
353
Virginia died without children, and intestate, leaving (it is said) a considerable fortune. John Paul “took charge of the estate on behalf of his family,” with the result that the family does not appear to have got a penny of the money. What exactly he did with it will never be known;
“ BART . . . BHOVTID BACK, ‘ FISHING BOAT ! ’ ” (p. 350).
but it seems probable that our hero deserved to be locked up in a stronger place than a summer-house, and on other grounds than symmetry. At any rate, he lay low for a couple of years in America, and only emerged from his hiding in December, 1775, to enlist in the Revolutionary' Navy under the alias of “Paul Jones.”
In the summer of 1777 we find him appointed to the command of the Hanger, a new frigate-built ship of twenty-six guns, with orders to cross over to France. He did so, refitted at Brest, and sailed off to harry the 23
Digitized by LnOOQle
354 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
coasts of the Irish Sea, of Cumberland, and of the south-west of Scotland. He had determined to begin by burning the shipping in the port of Whitehaven; but, arriving off the entrance of Belfast Lough on April 21st, 1778, he learned that the Drake, a sloop of war, was at anchor, inside, and conceived the bold idea of carrying her by surprise. His plan was to run in in tlie dark, let go his anchor on top of the Drake’s, and board. The Drake suspected no danger, and her watch was most carelessly kept It was a cold night, blowing fresh. The chances were that not a dozen men on board were awake, and there were neither forts nor soldiers to support the Drake from the shore. The plan might well have succeeded, but, as it happened, the Ranger had foo much way on, and, though she let go her anchor very accurately, she drove past the sloop, and brought up on her quarter. Knowing that this would not serve his purpose, Jones, with great presence of mind, at once whipped out his knife and cut the cable, so as to make it appear that it had parted, and stretched out to seaward, meaning to return and try again.
' But, meanwhile, the weather had freshened to a gale, which obliged him to shelter tinder the lee of the Scotch coast. Being there, be determined to have his try at Whitehaven, and fetched up off the town in the early part of the night of the 22nd. By midnight, two boats, carrying thirty-one officers and men, pushed off' from the ship. The harbour was, as it still is, dry at low water. About 300 ships that were there lay hopelessly aground; nor, if they were set on fire, could water be found anywhere to put out the flames. The dilapidated little battery at the entrance of the harbour was guarded by only a few ramshackle old guns, and a few equally ramshackle old pensioners, who, at four o'clock in the morning, were snoring in their beds. Jones, with a handful of men, climbed the rampart of the battery, captured the garrison, and spiked the wretched guns. One boat had already passed in to burn the ships on the north side, and he now dispatched his second boat to attend to the ships on the south side, while he, with one companion, went off and spiked the guns of another battery that had been left without any guards at all. •
On his return, he found that his orders had been neglected ; the candles had burnt out, and there was no light. The boat had come back from the north side without doing anything, the lieutenant in charge remarking that “ no good could be done by burning poor people’s property.” Possibly the officer .in the second boat thought the same. At any rate, daylight was close at hand; the inhabitants were waking up, and nothing had been done.
Jones's wrath was a sight for gods and men. With his own hands he kindled a large fire in the steerage of one ship, emptied a tar barrel on the flames, and then had to run for it, and, jumping into his boat, pull
Digitized by GOOQle
JONES AT WHITEHAVEN AND AT SELKIRK HALL.
355
off for dear life, for the inhabitants were now running down to the piers in hundreds. However, the old guns were spiked, and so the party got clear away. On reaching the ship, one man only was found to be missing. He was a Whitehaven man, and had amiably spent the night in arousing his fellow-townsmen.
Having got his boats on board, Jones steered across Kirkcudbright Bay to St. Mary’s Isle, a small wooded peninsula, where stood the house of his old employer, the Earl of Selkirk. To the gaudy and half-educated ruffian it appeared a magnificent plan to kidnap Lord Selkirk, and carry him off as a prisoner. Childish recollections, perhaps, gave Jones an exaggerated idea of the Earl’s importance to the general interests of Great Britain.
The Earl escaped by the simple accident of being away from home. On hearing of his absence, Jones ordered his landing party back to the boat. They became mutinous, and demanded leave to march up and loot the house. As a compromise, Jones sent them up tinder two lieutenants, Simpson and Hall. They must have made a pretty show. “ The diversity of arms with which the party were equipped further confirmed the bad opinion entertained of the • marauders. These consisted of muskets, pistols, swords, etc., and one fellow bore an American tomahawk over his shoulder. The men
FALL JONES, stood on the lawn, and drank Lady Selkirk’s
health in Scotch whiskey, whilst Masters Simpson and Hall, indoors, demanded the production of all the plate in the house. She answered that there was very little, but, such as it was, they should have it.” Accordingly, the whole was laid before them, even the silver teapot which was used at breakfast, and which had not since been washed out! ” It was carried off, tea-leaves and
all, with the rest of the plate, and the party returned to the Ranger, which immediately weighed and stood out to sea.
A few days after, Lady Selkirk received a letter from Jones, written in his usual bombastic style, expressing profuse regret at the robbery, and vowing that he had done all he could to prevent it. He added that he would endeavour to buy back the plunder from the men, and transmit the whole, or as much as he could obtain, to her ladyship.
Several years passed without any further word from Jones, and all hope that he would fulfil his promise had vanished. But in the spring of the year 1783, to the great and agreeable surprise of Lady Selkirk, the whole of the plate was returned, carriage paid, precisely as it had been taken away, and, apparently, without ever having been unpacked—teapot, tea-leaves, and all The total value of the plunder is said to have been not more
Digitized by
Google
S56
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
than £100 altogether; but, undoubtedly, it brought more odium upon Jones than all the rest of his acts put together. As the street ballad had it:—
“You have heard o’ Paul Jones 1
Have you not ? Have you not 1
And you’ve heard o' Paul Jones ?
Have you not?
/ViUii, Poh^i it -s^i, itMrrfoju
WHITEHAVEN.
“ He was a rogue and a vagabond;
Was he not ? Was he not ? (Repeat.')
“ He came to Selkirk Ha’!
Did he not? Did he not? (Repeat.)
“ And stole the rings and the jewels a';
Did he not? Did he not?
Stole the rings and the jewels a’;
Did he not 1 ”
The day after this affair, April 24th, Jones was again off the entrance of Belfast Lough with designs upon the Drake. And, as if obeying his wishes, she was seen slowly working out against the tide and the light breeze. Her officers had been a good deal puzzled by the events of the night of the 21st, the more so as, in weighing her anchor on the 22nd, she had found a strange anchor and fifty-six fathom of cable, newly cut, entangled with it. However, they did not suspect the Hanger, but sent off
Digitized by LjOOQle
1HK DIVERSITY OF ARMS WITH WHICH THE PARTY WERE EQUIPPED" (p. 35^
Digitized by LnOOQle
358
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
a boat's crew either to ask the news or to impress some of her men. At any rate, Jones impressed them, and then bore down on the Drake, and raked her at close range. The Englishman bore up, and engaged broadside to broadside; but, in little over an hour, the heavier guns of the Ranger had knocked her to bits, and she struck her flag. Her captain was shot through the head, her lieutenant dying, three others killed, and twenty wounded.. If anyone wants a specimen of Jones’s style, he may find it in this account of the action, which, by the way, is part of the very letter in which Lady Selkirk was promised the return of her plate :—
“ Had the Earl been on board the Ranger the following evening, he would have seen the awful pomp and dreadfid carnage of a sea engage* ment, both affording ample subject for the pencil as well as melancholy reflection for the contemplative mind. Humanity starts back from such scenes of horror, and cannot sufficiently execrate the vile promoters of this detestable war. The British ship of war Drake, mounting twenty guns, with more than her full complement of officers and men, was our opponent The ships met, and the advantage was disputed with great fortitude on each side for an hour and four minutes, when the gallant commander of the Drake fell, and victory declared in favour of the Ranger. The amiable lieutenant lay mortally wounded; besides, near forty of the inferior officers and crew killed and wounded, a melancholy demonstration of the uncertainty of human prospects, and of the sad reverses of fortune which an hour can produce. I buried them in a spacious grave, with the honours due to the. memory of the brave.”
In the summer of 1779, we find Jones in command of a converted East Indiaman of forty guns, rechristened the Bonhomme Richard, having under him the Alliance frigate, of thirty-six guns; the Pallas, a French ship of thirty-two guns; the Cerf, of eighteen guns; and the Vengeance, of twelve guns—all French except the Alliance, but all sailing under the Stars and Stripes. After cruising with no very great success, on the 23rd of September, being then off Flam borough Head, they sighted a convoy of merchantmen coming from the Baltic, under escort of two ships of war the Serapis, of forty-four guns, and the Countess of Scarborough, a hired vessel, mounting twenty small six-pounders. Seeing Jones advancing, these ran to the south, to put themselves between the convoy and the foe. Meanwhile, news of the approaching engagement had reached Hull, and the people poured out to see, crowding the summit of Flamborough Head, off which the ships were tacking, barely three miles away. It was a clear autumn evening, and, as the sun set, the full harvest moon rose, and allowed the spectators to follow, or believe they followed, the progress of the fight.
Digitized by
Google
THE BOXHOMME EICH ARI).
359
At about half-past seven, the Bonhomme Richard closed with the Serapis, the two ships discharging their broadsides at the same moment. A few minutes after, the two ships had swung together, bow and stern, their starboard sides touching. Captain Pearson, of the Serapis, hoped to clear his ship, and to that end let go an anchor; he did not know that Jones had already lashed the two ships together. In number of men, the Sera pis and Bonhomme Richard were about equal; in guns, the Serapis had a distinct advantage, carrying her forty-four guns in two tiers, with the lower of which (18-pounders all) she banged her adversary into bits. On the other hand, this lower battery employed more men, and left the Bonhomme Richard with a decided superiority above. So, while Jones's crazy ship was rapidly going to pieces beneath him, his men, from the deck and tops, drove the Englishmen below with a perfect hail of musketry and hand-grenades.
Meanwhile, the Pallas had borne away for the absurdly inadequate Countess of Scarborough, and forced her, after an hour of very plucky resistance, to haul down her flag. The Alliance, instead of lending Jones effective aid (her captain, Pierre Landais, hated Jones), kept sailing round the Serapis and Bonhomme Richard, and knocking each about indiscriminately with round-shot as well as grape. She probably did as much damage to her own side as to the English.
At half-past nine, or thereabouts, a seaman of the Bonhomme Richard crept out on the main-yard, carrying with him a bucketful of hand-grenades. One of these he managed to drop down through the Scrapie's main hatchway on to her lower deck. It fell among a pile of cartridges; the explosion disabled many of the guns, and blew up the whole of the officers and crew abaft the mainmast. For a minute or two the Serapis thought of surrender.
But on board the Bonhomme Richard matters were no better. She was battered so that the carpenter came running to Jones, crying out that the ship was sinking. Hearing this, the gunner ran aft to run down the flag; but, finding it already shot away, began to bawl, “ Quarter, for God’s sake, quarter’” Jones smashed in his skull with the butt of a pistol Captain Pearson, hearing this cry, called out to Jones to say if they had struck. Getting no answer, he attempted to board, but was driven back The mas ter-at-arms of the Bonhomme Richard, also hearing the cry, let loose the prisoners from the holds. More than a hundred of them ran upon deck, and might easily have settled the fight there and then, had not Jones, with colossal coolness, ordered them to set to work at the pumps, and at the pumps these poor deluded creatures continued. Both ships were, by this time, beaten to a standstill, and it was just a toss-up which should surrender. Probably, the presence of the Alliance settled it. She had done no good; but Captain Pearson naturally expected her to mean business. Consequently, about half-past ten, the Serapis struck, her mainmast, at the same time, going by the board
Digitized by LnOOQle
360
THE STOHY OF THE SEA.
Meanwhile, the convoy, valued at £600,000, had run into safety. The Serapis was taken, and Paul Jones sailed away with her and the Countess of Scarborough, the Bonhomme Richard having sunk at about ten in the morning after the fight. Pearson, who, after all, had saved the convoy
11 A SEAMAN
CREPT GUT OX THE MAIN-YARD ” (p. 5®).
(though his defence was not brilliant), received the thanks of the merchants of London, with a sword of honour. Moreover, the King knighted hint Jones’s remark, on hearing this piece of news, shows some humour: " If I have the luck to fall in with him again, I’ll make a lord of him.’
Digitized byTooele
CHAPTER XV
DUELS ON THE SEA.
8ingle-«hip Actions—The Quebec und J.n Surreillante—The Advantage of the Weather-gauge—The Quebec takes Fire—Humanity of the French—Captain George Walker and his “ Royal Family"—Ho Chases the Spanish C/oriMO—Previous Strange Adventures of the Glorioso—Frigate r. Line-of-Battle Ship—A Long Chase—The Fate of the Dartmouth and the Luck of the Hon. John O’Brien —The Indefatigable, A mason, and Droits de VHomme—Gallant Fight of Captain La Crosse—Breakers Ahead !—Wreck of tho Amason—Wreck of the Droits de I’ Hoinme—FAtorts to Reach the Shore— Horrible Sufferings on Board—Saved at Last—Tho Speedo—How she first Deceived and then Beat the Spaniard—British Seamen After Trafalgar—Captain Broke of the SA nanon —The Famous Fight of the Shannon and the Chesapeake.
11 The captain stood oil the carronade, ‘First lieutenant,’ says he, ‘Send all my merry men aft here, for they must list to me.
I haven’t the gift of the gab, my sons, because I’m bred to the sea;
That ship there is a Frenchman, who means to fight with we.
“‘That ship there is a Frenchman, and if we don’t take she, Tis a thousand bullets to one that she will capture we. I haven’t the gift of the gab, my boys, so each man to his gun ; If she’s not mine in half an hour, I’ll flog each mother’s son.
For odds, bobs, hammer and tongs, long as I’ve been to sea, I’ve fought ’gainst every odds, and I’ve gained the victory ! ’ ”
SO sang Marry at's old captain, and the history of naval warfare (especially at the close of the last century and the beginning of the present)
is foil of such duels as he here anticipated. Nor would our survey of the methods of naval warfare be at all perfect if we omitted to write about the conduct of these encounters, giving some notable examples by way of illustration.
An early single ship action, and one of the most instructive in many ways, was that fought between the English frigate Quebec and the French La Surveillante off the coast of Brittany in October, 1780.
The Quebec, Captain Farmer, was sent out from Portsmouth to watch the French coast, and, as the author of “lonica” sings:
“Then proud was Captain Farmer in a frigate of his own, And grander on his quarter-deck than George upon the throne;
Digitized by
Google
362
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
He’d two guns in his cabin, and on the spar-deck ten, And twenty on the gun-deck, and more than ten score men.
‘‘And as a huntsman scours the brakes with sixteen brace of dogs, With two-and-thirty cannon the ship explored the fogs;
From Cape La Hogue to Ushant, from Rochefort to Belleisle, She hunted game till reef and mud were rubbing on her keel.”
Now, it happened that about the same time tho French frigate La SurveUlante was sent out from Brest to keep a watch on an English fleet which was expected to be leaving Spithead; and at sunrise on 6th October the two frigates encountered each other in the Channel, and quickly cleared their decks for action.
The two were about of equal size, the crews of both were picked men, and in Du Couedic Captain Fanner met with courage and skill equal to his own. The Frenchman had the advantage of a clean hull (the Quebec's was foul) and the windward position, and in spite of Farmer’s manoeuvres she kept the weather-gauge and opened the attack.
But here we must break off to explain the meaning of this term " weather-gauge ” and its importance in all stories of sea-fights while seafights were conducted under canvas and without steam-power.
A ship was said to have the weather-gauge, or “ the advantage of the wind,” when she lay to windward, and could thus steer for her opponent, while the latter could not head straight for her. Clearly then, the advantage of the weather-gauge was that it conferred the power of giving or refusing battle at will, which again gave the advantage which attack always holds over defence—viz., that the attacking party can choose the conditions under which he will fight, while the defending party has to watch him and adapt his tactics to his enemy’s movements. The ship with the lee-gauge could not attack; and if she did not choose to retreat, she had to take up the defensive and accept the battle on the enemy’s terms. She had, however, the slight compensation of being able to rake the enemy as he approached and before he could get into position for replying by turning his broadside on her. ” These radical differences between the weather and the leegauge were so clearly recognised through the crowd of lesser details accompanying them that the former was ordinarily chosen by the English, because their steady policy was to assail and destroy the enemy ; whereas the French sought the lee-gauge, because by so doing they were usually able to cripple the enemy as he approached, and thus evade decisive encounters and preserve their ships. The French, with rare exceptions, subordinated the action of the Navy to other military considerations, grudged the money spent upon it, and therefore sought to economise their fleet by assuming a defensive position, and limiting its efforts to the repelling of assaults.” *
•“The Influence of Sea-Power upon History.” By Captain A. T. Mahan, United States Nary, p. 6. (London : Sampson Low.}
Digitized by GOOQle
THE QUEBEC AND LA SURVEILLANTE.	363
On this occasion, however, the Frenchman had the weather-gauge, and kept it. She was also the first to open fire with her forward guns, and then ran down so close to the Quebec that at times there was scarcely room between the two vessels for the rammers of the men who were serving the guns.
This broadside mauling went on for some time, with heavy loss to both sides. The French captain had received two wounds in the head, and his first and second lieutenants were both badly wounded, when a “hurrah!” went up from the Quebec as a shot carried away the signal-halliards of La Surveillante, and the French flag fell into the sea. They imagined, of course, that Du Couedic had struck; but his second pilot, seeing what was wrong, climbed to the top of the mizzen-mast and, shouting “ Vive le roil” made fast another flag. The English, meanwhile, rained bullets on him, but by some miracle he again gained the deck unhurt Almost as he reached it, however, the three masts of La Surveillante came down with a run, and within five minutes the three masts of the Quebec also went by the board, falling towards the French frigate, and so making a bridge for the boarders.
The French at once prepared to board, when thick clouds of smoke and a rush of flame rose from the Quebec. A light spar with a sail attached had tumbled down across a blazing gun and taken fire. The flames gathered way so rapidly that not only the masts of the Quebec— now lying between the two frigates—became ignited, but the bowsprit of La Surveillante took the blaze. And now, as Mr. Cory writes:—
-	“ The guns were hushed on either side, the Frenchmen lowered boats,
They flung us planks and hencoops, and everything that floats; They risked their lives, good fellows 1 to bring their rivals aid, Twas by the conflagration the peace was strangely made.”
As soon as Du Couedic could disengage his frigate, he set himself and his men to save his foes of a minute before, calling out, “ Look sharp, my lads: these men are no longer our enemies; they are Christians, and they are brothers.” Unhappily, on board the French frigate only one boat remained seaworthy, the rest being either riddled with shot or crushed by the fall of the masts;	and	in lowering this	boat the sailors let	it	strike against
the muzzle of	one	of the	guns, by	which it was stove	in	and	rendered
useless.
On board	the	Quebec	Captain Farmer, notwithstanding	three	wounds,
kept the deck	and	refused	to budge;	but, seeing that all	hope of	arresting
the flames must be abandoned, turned his attention to saving the remains of his crew. The Quebec had also but one boat left, and this Captain Farmer ordered his first lieutenant, who was wounded, to take charge o£
" No, not I,” pleaded the lieutenant, “ but you, captain, who are wounded worse than I. Let me remain.”
"Do as I tell you,” said Captain Farmer, sharply.
The boat was lowered, but so many men jumped into her that she
Digitized by GOOQle
364
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
was instantly swamped, and a few only of the men managed to support themselves upon the oars, and spars, and hencoops flung them by the enemy, and so get on board La Surveillante.
The rising wind again carried the Quebec close alongside La Surveillante,
and again the French ship’s bowsprit caught fire, tumbled on to her de?ks, and it was with the Frenchmen managed to back her oft' from Englishmen left on board (be it said in their to help.
Meanwhile, on the crowded quarter-deck—the
Masses of burning debris greatest difficulty that the the burning frigate, the honour) doing their best
waist of the Quebec being
Digitized by^OOQlC
HUMANITY OF THE FRENCH.
365
now a furnace of fire—Fanner could still be seen encouraging his men; and so he continued to encourage them until a flash and a roar burst from the English frigate’s ports, and she was blown high in air and strewn in fragments upon the sea.
Forty-three British sailors reached La Surveillante, and as they climbed up to her deck Du Couedic generously told them that, since their frigate had perished with colours flying, they would be treated, not as prisoners of war, but as brother-seamen rescued from shipwreck.
Night fell, and it was hard work in the still rising east wind to head the leaking hulk of La Surveillante, and keep it headed for the port of Brest. All night the forty-three surviving Englishmen worked hard beside their late enemies to keep her afloat. Day broke, and with it land was sighted. Very soon a number of fishing-boats put out from the French coast, and ten of these, taking the La Surveillante in tow, managed to get her into Brest in safety.
“ SRB WAS BLOWN HIGH IN AIR ” <J>. 365)
Perhaps the most striking series of single ship actions ever fought will be found in the story of Captain George Walker’s adventures with the Spanish line-of-battleship Glorioso in the year 1747.
The history of the affair is briefly as follows:—In the summer of 1745
Digitized by LnOOQle
366 the story of the sea.
a number of London adventurers had fitted out three large privateers to sail in company under the command of a certain' Captain Talbot. The venture was so successful that the owners netted £700,000 as the result of the cruise. Naturally, this suggested a second cruise on a more extensive scale. But Captain Talbot, having made his little fortune, preferred to be a sleeping partner in the new adventure, and so the Londoners had to cast about for a new commodore. Very naturally, too, they hit on the famous Captain George Walker whose exploits we have already alluded to in our chapter on privateering. Owing to the success of the former expedition—in which each seaman had picked up £850 as his share of prize-money—and the reputation of Captain Walker, there was no difficulty in collecting hands; and by the end of April, 1746, the four ships King George, Prince Frederick, Duke, and Princess Amelia were ready to sail from Bristol The little squadron was commonly known as “ The Royal Family,” and carried altogether 122 guns and 970 men.
In eight months’ time they put into Lisbon, having made prizes to the amount of £220,000 and more, without the loss of a man. The ships refitted, and put to sea again on July JOth, 1747, “The Royal Family” being now increased to six by the addition of the Prince George and the Prince Edward tender. Three days later the Prince Edward went down in a curious way. She had crowded so much canvas that the pressure started the heel of the mainmast out of the step, and, the mast knocking a hole in the ship’s bottom, caused her to founder in a few minutes, with a loss of all but three hands.
After some more profitable captures Walker’s squadron put into Lagoa Bay to water, and there, on the 6th of October, about 5 o’clock in the morning, the King George and Prince Frederick, having filled up, were standing out of the bay, when they sighted a large ship approaching off Cape St. Vincent. Walker at once gave the signal to chase; but of his little vessels only two were of immediate use—his own, the King George, of thirty-two guns and 300 men, and the Prince Frederick, of twenty-six guns and 260 men. With these, however, he tried to hem in the chase, which turned out to be nothing less than a Spanish man-of-war, the Glorioso, of seventy guns and 700 men.
Now, the Glorioso’s voyage had already been a very eventful one. She had started home from the Spanish main with treasure in her hold amounting, it is said, to three millions. Off the Azores she fell in with two English ships, the Lark, of forty, and the Warwick, of sixty guns. The Warwick attacked her, but, receiving no support from the Lark, had her masts and rigging shot to pieces, and was unable to pursue. So the Glorioso went on her way. A few days later she fell in with the Oxford, of fifty guns, in company with the Shoreham frigate and Falcon sloop. It was a time in the story of the British Navy when a captain had only to show the white feather before an enemy and then go home and be
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE “liOYAL FAMILY" CHASE THE GLOXIOSO.
367
honourably acquitted by court-martial; a state of things which lasted until the execution of Admiral Byng nine years later. The captain of the Oxford declined to attack a ship of seventy guns, and so the Glorioso reached Ferrol in safety and landed her treasure. From Ferrol she sailed to Cadiz, and on her way was sighted and chased by Captain Walker, as we have told.
The chase lasted till noon, when the King George came up with her. As she did so the wind fell dead calm, and the two ships lay within gun-shot of each other, the Prince Frederick being some distance to southward. Lying thus, the Spaniard hoisted her colours and ran out her lower tier, thus showing
that she was a seventy or seventy-four-gun ship; and why she did not take the opportunity of firing on the King George and sinking her it is impossible to guess. On the other hand, it was obviously Walker’s cue to keep quiet, and so the two ships lay until about 5 o'clock, when a light breeze sprang up from the northward, and
CAl'E ST. V1XCEXT.
the Glorioso again
headed for Cadiz, The
King George followed, leaving her consort far astern, and
by 8 o’clock, in brilliant moonlight, ranged up alongside the Glorioso and hailed her. The big Spaniard promptly replied by firing his whole broadside, knocking over two of the King George's guns and bringing down her main topsail-ya rd. The answer was not unexpected by 11 alker’s men, who were lying down at their quarters, and now, jumping to their feet, they returned the compliment before the Spanish guns had well ceased to roar.
" Thus,” says Professor Laughton, in his “ Studies in Naval History,” “ began a battle that has absolutely no parallel in naval history. There are plenty of instances of a frigate hanging on to and embarrassing the retreat of a line-of-battleship, detaining her until some heavier ship came up. Thus, in 1756, the English sixty-gun ship Warwick was brought to bay by the French frigate Atalante; thus, in 1795, tho Berwick, of seventy-four guns, was
captured by the action of the Alcester; and thus, in 1800, was the French
Digitized by
Google
368
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
Guillaume Tell, ot eighty guns, delayed and finally captured by the pertinacity of the Penelope. Other noteworthy actions have there been between frigates and ships of the line, as when, in 1781, the French Afinerve defended herself for an hour against the seventy-four-gun ship Courageux, being aided by the heavy sea, which prevented the Courageux opening her lower deck ports. But I know of no instance except the present in which a frigate of any nation voluntarily placed herself, in smooth water and fine
'‘la scrvbjllaxtb rs row” (p. 3651
weather, alongside an enemy’s ship of the line and engaged her yard-arm to yard-arm; and that this frigate should be a much-despised privateer makes the affair still more remarkable.”
The frigate had only one thing in her favour. The Spanish vessels of that time had port-holes so small that they would not admit anything heavier than 24-pounders, and their sides were so thick that these small guns could only be trained or depressed at a limited angle. Thus, it might very well happen that a little vessel, being outside this angle, could only be reached by a casual shot.
None the less, after three hours' fighting, the King George was in a bad way, with her foremast disabled, her mainmast wounded, her maintopsail-yard (as we have seen) shot away and most of her running rigging cut to pieces. So light was the wind that not before half-past 10 did the Prlnee Frederick come up; and when she appeared, the Glorioso took to her heels. Walker was too badly shattered to allow his consort to 'pursue.
Digitized by GOOQle
GEORGE WALKER'S FEAT.
369
His loss in men, however, was trifling, and when morning broke and he found the condition of his ship not altogether desperate, and that the Duke and Prince George had come out of Lagoa Bay to his support, he despatched
“‘EXCISE THE UXEITXEBS UE MT DHESs ” (p. 370).
these with the Prince Frederick in pursuit, and himself followed slowly with the battered King George.
They had gone but a little way when a large ship was seen coming from the eastward. She turned out to be an English man-of-war, and Walker sent by one of his little tenders a hurried note to her captain explaining the 24
Google
370
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
situation. She was the Russell (eighty guns) homeward bound from the Mediterranean, and her captain, sending back a word of thanks to Walker for the news, crowded sail in pursuit of the Spaniard Soon after him came up the Princess Amelia, which was also sent on; and so pursued and pursuers passed away to the westward, the crippled King George being left far astern.
But suddenly, through his telescope, Walker saw the flying enemy hotly engaged, with the headmost ship. This he took to be the Prince Frederick, but the distance was too great to be certain. It was certain, however, that the firing was very brisk, and Walker cried out, " That fellow Dottin will fire away all his cartridges and have to load with loose powder, and likely enough some fatal accident will happen." He hardly said the words when, in place of the ship on which they were straining their eyes, there appeared a sudden column of smoke. “ Great Heavens! ” cried Walker, “ it has happened. She’s gone, and Dottin and all his brave fellows with her 1 ”
The ship blown up was not the Prince Frederick, however. To add to this queer chapter of accidents, it so happened that a British ship, the Dartmouth (fifty guns), had been cruising to the westward, had heard the firing of the night before, and was beating up to learn what all the noise was about. She thus fell in with the flying Glorioso, and engaged her in a running fight, which grew warmer and warmer until, by some unexplained accident, the fire reached the Dartmouth's magazine, and she blew up. The Prince. Frederick and the Duke, then fast coming up, lowered boats at once, but of her crew of 300 only fourteen were saved. One of these, a young lieutenant, the Hon. John O'Brien, was picked up insensible on the top of a floating gun-carriage. He was taken on board the Duke, and treated with all possible care. He had been blown through a port, and his clothes, of course, were all in tatters, torn and burnt. As soon os he came to himself and was introduced to the captain of the Duke, he said, with great gravity, “Sir, you must excuse the unfitness of my dress to come aboard a strange ship, but, really, I left my own with so much precipitation that I had not time to put on better."
Even before this accident the luck of John O’Brien was a proverb. His first mishap was on the coast of India, where his ship was wrecked with the loss of all hands except himself and four sailors. He next embarked in a vessel to return to England, but was cast away near the Cape of Good Hope, where he alone of the ship’s crew contrived to get safely to shore. This makes him one out of a total of five people saved in two shipwrecks. But there is more astonishment to come. At the Cape the Dutch Governor, finding him to be a person of quality, supplied him with every necessary for continuing his voyage, and provided him a cabin in one of the Dutch homeward-bound East Indiamen. Just as Mr. O’Brion’s *ugg"go w«s being put on board, a Dutch Governor of some of the Eastern
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE LUCK OF JOHN O’BRIEN.
371
settlements in India, who was to return to Europe in the same ship, finding himself straitened for room (his family being a large one), applied to the Governor of the Cape and told him he would esteem it a particular favour if the other passengers could be prevailed upon to quit the ship and leave it entirely to his family and suite. O’Brien, being offered accommodation on board another ship which was to sail on the same day, complied with all the pleasure in life. Within twenty-four hours after putting to sea he saw with his own eyes the ship he had quitted founder in a gale of wind, taking with her every soul on board I
But we must return to the chase. Awed by the disaster to the Dart-•mouth, the rest of the pursuers for awhile held off from an attack, but soon after midnight the Russell ran up alongside the Glorioso and engaged her, taking her at length after an action which the Spaniards maintained with great spirit for nearly five hours. The chagrin of the English when they learned that the Glorioso—which was said to have three millions sterling on board—had already landed her treasure at Ferrol may be imagined. One of the owners of “The Royal Family,” indeed, gave Walker " a very uncouth welcome for venturing their ship against a man-of-war." Walker answered, “Had the treasure been aboard, as I expected, your compliment had been otherwise; or, had we let her escape with that treasure on board, what would you then have said ? ” At any rate, Walker had the consolation of having performed an unique exploit at the beginning of the chase in running his little King George alongside a seventy-gun ship and engaging her yard-arm to yard-arm.
We pass on now to the year 1796, when the French, having determined on an invasion of Ireland, made their famous and unfortunate attempt to disembark 18,000 men in Bantry Bay; and when a fleet of seventeen ships of the line and thirteen frigates, with smaller vessels bringing up the total to forty-four sail, set out from Brest with' this object. They sailed, under the command of Vice-Admiral Morard de Galles, on the 16th of December, 1796. The utmost secrecy was observed concerning the whole expedition, and the fleet sailed under sealed orders. When the packet containing these orders was broken, the rendezvous was found to be Mizen Head, at the extreme south-west of Ireland.
The expedition was dogged by misfortune from the very outset. An English fleet, under Vice-Admiral Colpoys, was cruising in the Channel; and, in trying to escape from this fleet, one of the French line-of-battle ships, Le Seduisant (seventy-four guns), struck on the Grand Stevenet rock, outside Brest, and was lost with about 680 men. Soon after, a gale arose and dispersed the fleet. They managed to reunite, however, and gain the Irish coast, where, on the night of the 22nd of December, a furious gale arose from the eastward and continued, with intervals, until the 29 th. Some of the French ships took refuge in the Shannon, while others attempted to ride out the gale in Bantry
Digitized by GOOQle
372
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
Bay ; but the whole expedition was so thoroughly disorganised that they determined to give up the attempt and return to Brest.
On their way homeward the ships were again separated; the weather continued foul; many lost their masts, and almost all were seriously damaged. Among the ships which had sought refuge in the mouth of the Shannon was Lea Droits de UHomme (seventy-four guns), commanded by Commodore La Crosse, a very able and experienced officer. On the 7th of January, after seeking his fleet for some days, La Crosse steered back for the French coast; on the 13th he believed himself to be about twenty-five leagues off the Point de Penmarch, on the Breton coast, near Quimper. Thick weather came on, and M. La Crosse resolved for the present to approach no nearer to land; accordingly. Les Droits de I’Homme stood to the southward under easy sail, with a high sea running and the wind fresh on her starboard beam.
At half-past three in the afternoon she was aware of two smaller ships on her lee-bow, manoeuvring apparently to cut her off from the land. These were the British forty-four-gun frigate Indefatigable, commanded by our old friend Sir Edward Pellew (afterwards Lord Exmouth and the hero of Algiers), and the Amazon, a thirty-six-gun frigate, Captain R. C. Reynold.
At a quarter past four Les Droits de VHomme lost her fore- and maintopmasts in the heavy weather, and the Indefatigable ran up to her at' half-past five in tho evening, and tried to pass ahead and rako her. But La Crosse handled his crippled ship beautifully, and not only succeeded twice in frustrating Pellew’s manoeuvre, but even contrived to rake the Indefatigable’s stern after a fashion; but the high seas running compelled her to close her lower deck ports, and spoiled the aim of her gunners above, and the damage done was therefore very slight At about a quarter to seven the Amazon came up under press of sail, and the battle began in earnest and was continued until night At halfpast ten the mizzen-mast of the Frenchman was cut away, while the two English ships were repairing damages at a little distance. Seeing this, they ranged up again on her quarter. It was now announced to La Crosse that the round shot for the guns was running short " What does it matter ? ” said he: “ load with shell.” And, fired with half-charges, these shells caused immense damage on board the Indefatigable and the Amazon. At two o’clock in the morning a spent shot struck La Crosse on the knee and disabled him. As he was being carried below, he called out: “ My friends, swear to me that you will never strike your colours.” “Never - we will die first!” called back his French crew; and they fought the ship until half-past four in the morning, or about eleven hours in all So furiously ran the sea throughout this long fight that the men on the main-decks of the English frigates stood up to their middles in water, and so violent was the motion of the ships that some of the Indefatigable's guns broke their breechings four times, and many of their guns, owing to the water beating into them, had to be drawn in as soon as loaded. The Indefatigable had four feet of water in her hold; the Amazon nearly
Digitized by
Google
"HUSHED ON DECK" (p. 375).
Digitized by LnOOQle
374
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
three feet. Les Droits de I’Homme had 250 of her men put out of action, and was just a floating wreck. And at this point a greater power than man’s interfered.
It was about 4.20 a.m. when the moon, opening rather brighter than it had done, showed to Lieutenant George Bell, who was looking out from the Indefatigable’s forecastle, a glimpse of land right ahead; and hardly had he called the news when the deadly white line of breakers was seen by all on deck. The Indefatigable was at this time close to the Droits de I'Homme’s starboard bow, and the Amazon close on her port bow. The Indefatigable’s crew, with great self-possession, smartly hauled on board the tacks and headed their vessel to the southward. The land could not at first be recognised, but was supposed to be Ushant. Had it been so, the ship's position gave little cause for fear. But, just before day, breakers were seen upon the lee-bow. The ship was instantly wore to northwards, and for awhile the crew could do little more than “ wish for day,” like St Paul's shipmates. Day came at about half-past six; and, land appearing very close ahead and on the weather bow, and breakers to leeward, the ship was again wore to the southward. At 7.10 A.M. they spied between them and the land the unhappy Droits de I’Homme, broadside uppermost, with a terrific surf beating over her. The Indefatigable, with the wind blowing dead on the shore, now known to be that of Audierne Bay, passed at about a mile's distance the wreck of her gallant enemy without a chance of offering her any succour. Her own salvation, indeed, depended on her weathering the dreaded Penmarch rocks. This, at about 11 A.M., she managed to do, passing a little more than half a mile to windward of them.
A minute or so after the Indefatigable had first wore to the southward, her consort, the Amazon, to whom she had promptly made the night-signal of danger, had wore to the northward. But in half an hour all the efforts of her officers and crew to work her off the shore were proved unavailing, and the Amazon grounded. The ship’s company, with the exception of six men who stole the cutter and were drowned in her, set to work to make rafts, and on these the whole were safely brought to land by 9 in the morning; but it was only to be made prisoners. A party of French soldiers at once marched them off to Audierne, a town situated about a league from the wreck; thence to Duarnez, and afterwards to Quimper. Here the prisoners remained and were well treated.
Meanwhile it had gone hardly with the unhappy Droits de I’Homme. She had been but a little later than the Indefatigable in discovering the breakers ahead; and just as she had altered her course, her fore-mast and bowsprit fell over her bows and checked the way which the ragged mainsail had given her. La Crosse now tried to bring up; but all the anchors had been lost in Bantry Bay except two, and the cables of these two had been rendered useless by the enemy's shot. A stout hawser, however, was bent to one of the anchors,
Digitized by GOOQle
THE DROITS DR VHOMME.
375
ready for letting go. Meanwhile, the remains of the mainsail having blown from the yard, the ship scarcely moved ahead. The anchor was dropped in twelve fathoms; but it did not hold an instant, and at seven in the morning the ship struck on a sandbank directly opposite to the town of Plouzenec in the Bay of Audierne. The second shock carried away her mainmast. Four or five guns of alarm were fired, and others were thrown overboard in the endeavour to ease the ship.
The Droits de I’Homme carried several English prisoners on board, among them a Lieutenant Pipon, who afterwards published an account of the wreck. As soon as their danger had become evident to the French crew, the cry of "Palivres Anglais.' pauvres Anglais.' montez bien vite, nous sommes tous perdus!” resounded through the ship. The English prisoners, whose station during the fight had been the cable-tier, rushed on deck. Here was an awful sight; the decks slippery with blood, the ship without a mast standing, and-breakers all around! The Indefatigable was seen on the starboard quarter, fighting off, in a tremendous sea, from the Penmarch rocks. On the leeboard side, about two miles away, was seen the Amazon, whose fate had just come to her. That of Les Droits de I’Homme drew near. She struck. The waves at once began to break clean over her and sweep her men from the decks. Day dawned, and the shore was seen lined with people. But in such a gale, and with such seas running, no help could be sent. As soon as it was low water some of the boats were launched. The first two were carried away at once by the waves and broken to pieces against the rocks that lined the beach. A raft was next constructed of spare yards and made fast to the end of a rope, which was slackened by degrees from the ship to allow it to drift on shore. It was thus proposed to get a pass-rope fixed between the shore and the ship. But the weight of the rope retarding the raft in its progress, and a sea washing off some of the men that were on it, the remainder cut themselves clear and gained the shore. The attempt to get a rope on shore by this means was again tried, and again failed. At length the master sailmaker, Lamand6 by name, offered to swim ashore with a cord, to which a suitable pass-rope might afterwards be attached; but by the time he reached about half-way to the shore his strength gave out, and he was dragged on board again by his own cord, without which he must certainly have perished. The day closed in and an awful night followed. The dawn of the second day, the 15th, brought with it but an increase of misery. The sea had stove in the stern and filled the hold with water, and for nearly thirty hours her people had been obliged to do without food. At low water this day a small boat was hoisted out, and an English captain and eight seamen, part of the prisoners, succeeded in reaching the shore. Elated at the success of these daring fellows, all thought their deliverance at hand, and many- of the Frenchmen launched out on their rafts; but death soon concluded their hopes. Another night was lingered through. On the third day, the IGth, larger rafts were built, and the largest boat was
Digitized by GOOQle
876
THE STONY OF THE SEA.
got over the side. The intention was, to place in this boat the surviving wounded, the two women and six children, and the helpless men. But it is not wonderful that these days and nights of suffering had broken down the spirit of obedience on board this gallant ship. Nearly 120 men, in defiance of their officers, jumped into the boat and sank it. A huge wave came at the same instant; and for nearly a quarter of an hour, neither the boat nor its contents were visible. Too soon, however, were seen the bodies of the wretched
‘•IT TO THEIS MIUULE.S IN WATER ” (p. 372}.
victims floating in all directions. The sight so moved a French AdjutantGeneral, named Renier, that he resolved to gain help from the shore or die in the attempt. He plunged into the sea, and was drowned.
According to Lieutenant Pipon, already close on 900 had perished when the fourth night came, renewing horrors. “ Weak, distracted, and wanting everything,” says the lieutenant, “we envied the fate of those whose lifeless corpses no longer needed sustenance. The sense of hunger was already lost, but a parching thirst consumed our vitals. Recourse was had to wine and salt water, which only increased the want Half a hogshead of vinegar floated up, and each had half a wine-glass full. This gave a momentary relief, yet soon left
Digitized by LnOOQle
SUFFERINGS ON THE WRECK.
377
us Again in the same state of dreadful thirst. Almost at the last gasp, everyone was dying with misery, the ship, which was now one-third shattered away from the stern, scarcely afforded a grasp to hold by to the exhausted and helpless survivors. The fourth day, the 17th, brought with it a more serene sky, and the sea seemed to subside ; but to behold from fore and aft the dying in
“a baft was constkuctbd ” (p. 373).
all directions was a sight too shocking for the feeling mind to endure. Almost lost to a sense of humanity, we no longer looked with pity on those who were the speedy forerunners of our own fate, and a consultation took place to sacrifice someone to be food to the remainder. The die was going to be cast, when the welcome sight of a man-of-war brig renewed our hopes, A cutter speedily followed, and both anchored at a short distance from the wreck. They then sent their boats to us, and, by means of large rafts, about 150, of near 400 who attempted it, were saved by the brig that evening; 380 were left to endure
Digitized by Google
378
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
another night’s misery, when, dreadful to relate, above one-half were found dead next morning.”
The man-of-war brig was the Arrogante, commanded by Enseigne de Vaisseau Provost, and the cutter the Aiguille. Lieutenant Pipon thus concludes his narrative: “ I was saved at about 10 o'clock on the morning of the 18th, with my two brother-officers, the captain of the ship, and General Humbert They treated us with great humanity on board the cutter, by giving us a little weak brandy and water every five or six minutes, after which a basin of good soup. I fell on the locker in a kind of trance for nearly thirty hours; and was swelled to that degree as to require medical aid to restore iny decayed faculties. We were taken to Brest almost naked, having lost all our baggage. There they gave us a rough shift of clothes, and, in consequence of our sufferings, and the help we afforded in saving many lives, a cartel was fitted out by order of the French Government, to send us home without ransom or exchange. We arrived at Plymouth on the 7th of March following.”
Our next story is less tragic. In 1800 Lord Cochrane, afterwards the Earl of Dundonald, was appointed to command the fourteen-gun brig-sloop Speedy, with orders to cruise in the Mediterranean. The Speedy must have been little more than a burlesque on a vessel of war, even in those days. Says her commander— “ She was about the size of an average coasting brig, her burden being 158 tons. She was crowded, rather than manned, with a crew of eighty-four men and six officers, myself included. Her armament consisted of fourteen ^-pounders!—a species of gun little larger than a blunderbuss, and formerly known in the service as ' Minion/ an appellation which it certainly merited.
“ Being dissatisfied with her armament, I applied for, and obtained, a couple of 12-pounders, intending them as bow- and stern-chasers, but was compelled to return them to the ordnance wharf, there not being room on deck to work them; besides which, the timbers of the little craft were found on trial to be too weak to withstand the concussion of anything heavier than the guns with which she was previously armed.
“ With her rig I was more fortunate. Having carried away her mainyard, it became necessary to apply for another to the senior officer, who examining the list of spare spars, ordered the foretop gallant-yard of the Generew to be hauled out as a mainyard for the Speedy !
“The spar was accordingly sent on board and rigged, but, even this appearing too large for the vessel, an order was issued to cut off the yard-arms and thus reduce it to its proper dimensions. This order was neutralised by getting down and planing the yard-arms as though they had been cut, an evasion which, with some alteration in the rigging, passed undetected on its being again swayed up; and thus a greater spread of canvas was secured. The fact of the foretop gullant-yard of a second-rate ship being considered too large for the mainmast of my 'man-of-war' will give a tolerable idea of her insignificance.
Digit • ;d by LnOOQle
THE PLUCKY LITTLE SPEEDY.
379
“Despite her unformidable character, and the personal discomfort to which all on board were subjected, I was very proud of my little vessel, caring nothing for her want of accommodation, though in this respect her cabin merits passing notice. It had not so much as room for a chair, the floor being entirely occupied by a small table surrounded with lockers, answering the double purpose of storechests and seats. The difficulty was to get seated, the ceiling being only five feet high, so that the object could only be accomplished by rolling on the locker, a movement sometimes attended with unpleasant failure. The most singular discomfort, however, was that my only practicable mode of shaving consisted in removing the skylight and putting my head through to make a toilet-table of the quarter-deck.”
With this queer little craft, however, Lord Cochrane managed to do a great deal of damage to the Spanish coasting trade; so much, indeed, that the Government despatched armed vessels from several ports in pursuit of her. For some time these made little or no difference in the amount of her depredations: on the 21st of December, however, when off Plane Island, a little to the south of Alicante, she was very near catching a tartar. Seeing a large ship in shore that had all the appearance of a well-laden merchantman, Lord Cochrane promptly gave chase. As the Speedy came up, the Spaniard suddenly raised her ports, which she had kept purposely closed, and discovered a heavy broadside. Clearly the Speedy had been decoyed into the jaws of a formidable Spanish frigate, now crowded with men, who had before remained concealed below.
" That the frigate was in search of us,” says Lord Cochrane, “ there could be no doubt, from the deception practised. To have encountered her with our insignificant armament would have been exceedingly imprudent, whilst escape was out of the question, for she would have outsailed us, and could have run us down by her mere weight. There was, therefore, nothing left but to try the effect of a ruse, prepared beforehand for such an emergency. After receiving at Mahon information that unusual measures were about to be taken by the Spaniards for our capture, I had the Speedy painted in imitation of the Danish brig Clomer—the appearance of this vessel being well known on the Spanish coast. We also shipped a Danish quartermaster, taking the further precaution of providing him with the uniform of an officer of that nation.
“ On discovering the real character of our neighbour, the Speedy hoisted Danish colours, and spoke her. At first this failed to satisfy the Spaniard, who sent a boat to board us. It was now time to bring the Danish quartermaster into play in his officer’s uniform; and, to add force to his explanations, we ran the quarantine flag up to the fore, calculating on the Spanish horror of the plague, then prevalent along the Barbary coast
" On the boat coming within hail—for the yellow flag had effectually repressed the enemy's desire to board us—our mock officer informed the Spaniards that we were two days from Algiers, where at the time the plague was violently
Digitized byVrO( le
380
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
raging. This was enough. The boat returned to the frigate, which, wishing us a good voyage, filled, and made sail, whilst we did the same.”
About four months after, however, the Speedy being then off Barcelona, a large Spanish frigate was observed in chase, and was instantly identified by most of the crew with the vessel they had so smartly befooled. A number of Lord Cochrane’s officers had grumbled at not being permitted to attack the frigate fallen in with on the 21st of December, pointing out that after she was put off her guard by the false colours, a mur-
(From fAe Portrait jdftifal by StrotkUw tn M.)	.
derous fire might have been poured in before her crew had recovered from their confusion. Lord Cochrane now told them that they should have a fair fight: and although his men were reduced to fifty-four, officers and boys included, he gave orders to pipe all hands and prepare for action, and headed his little sloop towards the frigate, which was now coming down under steering sails.
Soon after 9 am., the vessels being now within gun-shot, the frigate fired a gun and hoisted Spanish colours, which Lord Cochrane acknowledged by hoisting American colours, his object being to puzzle the Spaniard until he got past her hill broadside. As soon as he could put the Speedy on the other tack, he ran up the British ensign and immediately afterwards received a broadside, and shortly afterwards another, in each case without much damage.
■ My orders,” writes Lord Cochrane, “ were not to fire a gun till we were close to her; when, running under her lee, we locked our yards amongst her rigging, and in this position returned our broadside, such as it was. To have fired our popgun four-pounders at a distance would have been to throw away ammunition, but the guns being doubly and, as I afterwards learned, trebly shotted, and being elevated, they told admirably upon her main deck; the first discharge killing the Spanish captain and the boatswain. My reason for locking my small craft in the enemy’s rigging was the one upon which I
Digitized by^OOQlC
THE SPEEDY AND THE GAMO.
381
mainly relied for victory, viz.: that, from the height of the frigate out of the water, the whole of her shot must necessarily go over our heads, whilst our guns, being elevated, would blow up her main deck.”
The Spaniards quickly found out, however, the disadvantage under which they were fighting, and gave the order to board the Speedy: but, the instant she heard the command given, the sloop sheered oft’, giving the Spaniards a broadside and a volley of musketry before they could recover themselves. The attempt was again marie, and again frustrated: and the Spaniards, finding they were only punishing themselves, gave up the attempt to board, and stood to their guns, which were now cutting up the Speedy's rigging from stem to stern.
This kind of combat could not last, and after an hour’s fighting Lord Cochrane told his men that they must either take the frigate or be themselves taken, in which case the Spaniards would give no quarter, whilst a few minutes energetically spent would decide the matter for the British.
The Speedy’s doctor, a Mr. Guthrie, volunteered to take the helm. Leaving him, therefore, for the time, both commander and crew of the Speedy, Lord Cochrane gave the word, and in a few seconds every man but the doctor had clambered on to the Spaniard's deck—a feat rendered easier by the beautiful manner in which the doctor had brought the Speedy alongside.
BARCELONA.
For a moment the Spaniards seemed taken by surprise, as though unwilling to believe that so small a crew could have the temerity to board them; but, quickly recovering themselves, they made a rush to the waist of the frigate,
Digitized by
Google
382
THE STORY OK THE SEA.
■where the fight was 'gallantly carried on for some minutes. Observing the enemy's flag still flying, Lord Cochrane whispered an order to one of his men to run and haul it down. The Spanish crew, not pausing to consider by whose orders the colours had been struck, and naturally believing it the act of their own officers, began to show signs of giving in, though their numbers were three hundred against forty. Lord Cochrane seized the critical moment with his usual readiness. He promptly hailed the Speedy, ordering fifty more men to be sent on board; though, as a matter of fact, of course, the solitary man in her was the doctor standing at the helm. The bluff succeeded, and within a minute or two the British were in possession of the Gamo frigate, of thirty-two heavy guns and 319 men, who an hour and a half ago looked upon the sloop as a certain if not an easy prey.
We quote Lord Cochrane again: “ Shortly before boarding, an incident occurred, which, by those who have never been placed in similar circumstances, may be thought too absurd for notice. Knowing that the final struggle would be a desperate one, and calculating on the superstitious wonder which forms an element in the Spanish character, a portion of our crew were ordered to blacken their faces, and what with this and the excitement of combat, more ferocious-looking objects could scarcely be imagined. The fellows thus disguised were directed to board by the head, and the effect produced was precisely that calculated on. The greater portion of the Spaniard’s crew was prepared to repel boarders in that direction, but stood for a few moments, ns it were, transfixed to the deck by the apparition of so many diabolical-looking figures emerging from the white smoke of the bow guns; whilst our other men, who boarded by the waist, rushed on them from behind before they could recover from their surprise.
“In difficult or doubtful attacks by sea ” (he concludes)— “ and the odds of fifty men to 320 comes within this description—no device can be too minute, even if apparently absurd, provided it have the effect of diverting the enemy’s attention whilst you are concentrating your own.”
The following table of the comparative strength of the two vessels will show the nature of the contest:—
a a mo	SPEEDY.
Main-deck guns.—Twenty-two long 12-	Fourteen 4-pounders.
paundera	
'Quarter-deck.—Eight long 8-pounders, and	None.
two 24-pounder carronades.	
Number of crew.—319.	Number of crew.—54.
Broadside weight of shot—190 Ihs.	Broadside weight of shot.—28 lbs.
Tonnage.—600 and upwards.	Tonnage.—158.
We will conclude this chapter on naval duels with the story of the famous action between the Shannon and the Chesapeake on June 1st, 1813.
The victory of Trafalgar, though it swept her enemies off the seas, and (as
Digitized by LnOOQle
CAPTAIN BROKE OF THE SHANNON.
383
we have said) made Waterloo but a question of time, was not altogether happy in its effect upon England’s Navy. Drunk with success, and having for the while no enemy left to contend with, our officers neglected the ordinary precautions of naval warfare, and began to pay attention rather to the ornaments than the fighting essentials of their ships. Even as early as 1806—scarcely a year after Trafalgar—Lord St Vincent wrote: “ There is great lack of seamanship in the service, and the young people now coming up are, for the most part, frippery and gimcrack." Upon which Captain Brenton comments: “ These observations will apply to any period of her service since 1806. ‘Frippery and gimcrack ’ were introduced about that period. The polishing system was carried to a shameful extent. I knew one captain of a guard-ship who employed his black-list men in polishing the breech of his main-deck guns and the ringbolts on the deck. In short, from that day to the end of the war, everything was to be polished; brass guns, and howitzers, and swivels on the capstan.”
The consequence was that when, in 1812, w'e had to fight the Americans, our national pride was wounded by the loss of frigate after frigate. Wo consoled our vanity by saying the Americans won continually by the superior size of their ships, stouter scantling, heavier guns, etc. The truth was, that our men were excellent polishers, but very bad gunners.
But there was one man, Captain Philip Bowes Vere Broke, of the Shannon frigate, who had determined to break this spell of ill-luck, and for six years had laboured to train his crew in the best traditions of the Old Navy. From the day when he first stepped on the Shannon’s deck, the 14th of September, 1806, her crew began to be something different from the ordinary run of crews. He found them an undersized, not very well disposed, and, in point of age, rather motley ship’s company. In a year or two they had become as pleasant to command as they would have been dangerous to meet. To the appearance of his frigate, Captain Broke paid but little attention; her bunting was rusty, and her sides stood sorely in need of paint. But he had paid special attention, at the Shannon'* first outfit, to the laying of her guns; and thenceforward his rule was every day, for about an hour and a half in the forenoon, to exercise his men in training the guns, and, for the same time in the afternoon, in the use of the broadsword, pike, musket, etc. Twice a week the crew fired at targets, both with great guns and musketry ; and Captain Broke gave a pound of tobacco to every man that put a shot through the bull’s-eye. His decks he kept constantly cleared for action, with enough ammunition for two or three broadsides ready at hand. The captain’s own cabin, too, as well as those of his officers, were denuded of everything not absolutely indispensable. The frigate, in short., despite her rough appearance, was kept in perpetual fighting trim.
.... During the month of May, 1813, there lay in Boston Harbour two American frigates, the Constitution and the Chesapeake. The former was undergoing a large repair, and was quite unfit for service at present. The Chesapeake,
Digitized by LnOOQle
384
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
however, was almost ready for sea—a famous vessel, not very much larger than the Shannon, and commanded just now by a distinguished American officer, Captain John Lawrence, fresh from a successful action with the British frigate Peacock
Now just outside Boston Harbour lay Captain Broke with the Shannon; and the desire of his heart was that the Chesapeake should come out and fight with him. Rather than reduce his crew by manning and sending in the prizes he took, Captain Broke destroyed all he captured; no less than twenty-five sail being sacrificed to keep the Shannon fit and ready to meet her foe. Such was his eagerness that he sent several verbal messages in to Captain Lawrence, inviting him to come out; and on the 1st of June, early in the morning, being
Digitized by GOOQle
CAPTAIN BROKE'S CHALLENGE.
385
doubtful if any of these had been delivered, he addressed to the commanding officer of the Chesapeake a letter of challenge worthy of quotation, if only for the frank and manly spirit which inspires every iine. The letter began: “ As the Chesapeake appears now ready for sea, I request you will do me the favour to meet the Shannon with her, ship to ship, to try the fortune of our respective flags.” Captain Broke then went on, with great candour and exactness, to describe the Shannon’s fighting strength; and, after fixing the place of meeting and providing against all interruption, concluded thus: “I entreat you, Sir, not to imagine that I am urged by mere personal vanity to the wish of meeting the Chesapeake; or that I depend only upon your personal ambition for your acceding to this invitation. We have both nobler motives. You will feel it as a compliment if I say that the result of our meeting may be the most grateful service I can render to my country; and I doubt not that you, equally confident of success, will feel convinced that it is only by repeated triumphs in even combats that your little navy can now hope to console your country for the loss of that trade it can no longer protect. Favour me with a speedy reply. We are short of provisions and water, and cannot stay long here.”
This letter Captain Broke despatched; and standing in close to Boston lighthouse with colours flying, there lay to. But Captain Lawrence needed no such challenge. Already, it is said, this gallant captain had landed five of his guns at Boston, in order that he might not have a numerical superiority over his British antagonist. At any rate, shortly after noon, before his challenge could have been delivered, and while his men were at dinner, Captain Broke himself climbed to the masthead, and there observed the Chesapeake fire a gun, loose and set topgallant sails, and get under way towards him. With her came down a number of pleasure-boats, besides a large schooner gunboat, having several American naval officers on board - all eager to witness the approaching engagement. At five minutes to one the Shannon filled, and stood out from the land under easy sail; and five minutes later the Chesapeake rounded tho lighthouse. The Shannon took in sail and braced her maintopsail flat and shivering, that the Chesapeake might overtake her; and at 5.25 p.m. down came the American on her starboard quarter, with three ensigns flying, besides a large white flag inscribed with the words, " Sailors' Rights and Free Trade.” The Shannon carried an Union Jack at the fore, an old rusty blue ensign at the mizzen-peak, and (rolled up and stopped, ready to be cast loose if either of the others should be shot away) one ensign on the mainstay, and another in the main rigging. Thinking it not unlikely that the Chesapeake would pass under the Shannon’s stern and engage her on the leeboard side, Captain Broke divided his men, and directed such as could not fire with effect to lie down as the enemy’s ship passed. But, either overlooking or waiving this advantage, Captain Lawrence, at ten minutes to six, gallantly luffed up on the Shannon’s starboard quarter, at about fifty yards’ distance, and, squaring his mainyard, gave three cheers.
25
Digitized byVrOOQlC
386
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
Here, upon the threshold of the fight, we may examine for a moment, the comparative force of the combatants. The following table, taken from James’s “Naval History,” gives this succinctly:—
	SHANNON.	CHESAPEAKE.
Broadside-guns	...	t No.	...	25 — 1 Lbs. ...	538	...	25 ...	590
Crew (men only)	...	...	...	306	.	...	376
Size	 ...	... Tons. ...	1,066	...	1,135
At ten minutes to six the Shannon's aftermost maindeck gun was fired. It was double-shotted and carried also a keg containing a hundred and fifty musket-balls. The captain of the gun, William Mindham, had orders to train it on the Chesapeake’s second maindeck port from foreward, and the shot was seen to strike close to its mark. In a second or so the Shannon’s next gun was fired; then the Chesapeake’s bow-gun went off, and then the remaining guns on the broadside of each ship as fast as they could be discharged.
Three minutes later the Chesapeake, having a good deal of way on her and for the moment “ blanketing,” or taking the wind out of the Shannon’s sails, was ranging too far ahead; and in order to keep his weather-gauge, Captain Lawrence hauled up a little.
In three minutes more, having had her jib-sheets and fore-topsail tier shot away, and her helm, probably from the death of the man stationed at it, being for the moment unattended to, the Chesapeake came so sharp to the wind as completely to deaden her way; and the American lay in consequence with her stern arid quarter exposed to her opponent’s broadside, which now took her diagonally, the shot from the aftermost guns smashing in her stem ports and sweeping the men from their quarters, while the shot from the foremost guns played on her ports abaft the mainmast.
At 6 p.m. precisely the Chesapeake drifted back upon the Shannon and fell on board, with her quarter pressing upon the Britisher’s side just before starboard main-chains; and there was stopped, her quarter-port hooking in the fluke of the Shannon’s anchor stowed above the chess-tree.
Captain Broke now ran forward, ordered the two ships to be lashed together, the great guns to cease firing, and the boarders to stand ready. While employed in lashing the ships, the Shannon’s old boatswain, Mr. Stevens (he had fought under Rodney), had his left arm hacked off with repeated sabrecuts, and was mortally wounded by musketry. His work was done, however, and, two minutes after, “ brave Broke ” leapt at the head of his men upon the Chesapeake?s quarter-deck. Here not an officer or man was to be seen. Upon the Chesapeake’s gangways some twenty-five or thirty Americans made a slight resistance. They were quickly driven towards the forecastle, where a few tried to get down the forehatchway, but choked it in their panic. Several then fled over the bows, and some jumped into the sea. The rest
Digitized by LnOOQle
Digitized by
Google
"THREE TALL AMERICANS .... WERE RUNNING UPON HIM" (p ®<>-
Digitized by GOOQle
THE FIGHT.
387
laid down their arms and submitted. Meanwhile the enemy kept up a brisk fire from the enemy’s main- and mizzen-top; and Captain Broke was in the act of giving orders to silence this fire when he heard a shout from the man he had stationed as sentry over the prisoners ■ in the forecastle., Turning sharply round, the captain found that three tall Americans had seized on this brief pause to arm themselves afresh, and were running upon him. He parried the middle fellow’s pike and wounded him in the face, but instantly received from the man on the pikeman’s right a blow with the butt-end of a musket, which bared his skull and nearly stunned him. Determined to finish the British commander, the third man cut him down with his broadsword, but at that very instant was himself cut down by Mindham, the same seaman that had fired the first shot into the Chesapeake. Meanwhile, a gallant midshipman, William Smith, had run along the Shannon’s fore-yard with half a dozen topmen, leapt on to the Chesapeake’s main-yard, which was braced up close to it, dropped into her main-top and silenced the fire there. Descending to the Chesapeake’s deck, he was just in time to assist Mindham and another of the Shannon’s men in helping Captain Broke on his legs. While in the act of tying a handkerchief round his commander’s head, Mindham flung a hand aloft and called out, “ There, sir, goes up the old ensign over the Yankee’s colours ■ ” Captain Broke saw it hoisting, and was content. He was at onco led to the Chesapeake’s quarter-deck, where he seated himself upon one of the carronade-slides.
The act of changing the Chesapeake's colours, however, proved fatal to the Shannon's first lieutenant, J. T. L. Watt. He had left quickly after his captain with a boarding party, and was shot through the foot as he stepped on the taflrail by a musket ball from the mizzen-top. He dropped on his knee upon the quarter-deck; jumped up again and hailed his men to point a 9-pounder upon the mizzen-top; then called for an English ensign, and, hauling down the American flag, bent, owing to a tangle in the halliards, the English flag below instead of above it. Seeing the American stripes going up first, the Shannon’s men opened fire again. They were always good marksmen. This time their aim was too good. They shot down their own first lieutenant and three or four of their comrades standing near him. Before the flags had got half-way to the mizzen-peak they were lowered again and hoisted properly, and the aggrieved and self-reproachful men of the Shannon ceased their fire.
The last sign of resistance was an unexpected discharge of musketry by the Americans who had fled into the hold On this Lieutenant Falkincr, third of the Shannon, ordered three or four muskets to be fired down. Captain Broke, from his seat upon the carronade-slide, ordered his lieutenant to summon the Americans in the hold to surrender if they desired quarter. He did so. The Americans replied, “We surrender;’’ and the fight was at an end. Almost immediately Captain Broke fainted from loss of blood, and was carried on board
Digitized by Goode
388
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
his own ship by a jolly-boat sent from the Shannon, which had dropped a little astern.
His captain being thus wounded and incapable, Lieutenant Provo William Parry Wallis, second of the Shannon, took charge of her, and Lieutenant Falkiner remained in charge of 'the Chesapeake. Having repaired damage, the two frigates made sail for Halifax ; and on June 6th, at 3.30 p.m., the prize, followed by her captor, passed along the wharves' of the town, amidst the cheers of the inhabitants, as well as of the crews of the ships of war then lying in the harbour. Captain LawTence, the chivalrous and brave commander of the CKssa-peake, had died of his wounds on board his own ship two days before. Captain Broke was near to death’s door; but recovered and received a baronetcy as well as the formal thanks of the Board of Admiralty. Lieutenants Wallis and Falkiner were both raised
SIR PHOTO WALLIN
(Front fA« iVtiRlinj hf .Vr. Holfdr iV. .Wji/,)
to the rank of com-
mander. The former died
in 1893 at the age of over one hundred years. His active service had ceased in 1858 ; but, owing to the exceptional length and character of his services, it was decided to retain his name on the active list till the end of his life. Other Admirals of the Fleet are obliged to retire at the age of seventy, and their names thereafter are printed in the “Navy List” in italics; but for ninety-six years that of Sir Provo Wallis was printed in the ordinary type and remained as our one link with the great post of the British Navy.
Digitized by Tooele
CHAPTER XVI.
PERILS OF COLLISION—COAST AND HARBOUR.
Collisions: The MuriUv, and the Nvrthjicet—The Jehu Run Down—Captain Whitear Pursues—A Long Chase and the end of it—Shaving the Shore—Defective Compasses —The Birkenhead—The Captain's Blunder—Splendid Discipline—The Survivors —Tampico Bar—Captai if William Watson’s Adventure— On a Lee Shore—A Last Chance—Highest Seas and Bluest Waters—Crossing the Bar—Signals from the Shore—Safe in Port.
OF the many dangers of the sea, the most difficult to provide against is probably the danger of collision. We have already told the fate of H.M.S. Victoria, and she, as everyone knows, was rammed and sunk in broad daylight and in sight of the whole Mediterranean Fleet. But it is fog that causes the greatest number of collisions, and it is fog that turns the hair of a ship’s captain white before its time. He has lights to provide against darkness. But lights will not ]jcnetrate a fog, and the fog-horn is but an uncertain safeguard at the best. And there are, unhappily, numbers of captains afloat who, having run into a ship and disabled her—perhaps fatally-—will head off, on the chance of escaping before they can bo recognised, rather than stand by and offer such help as humanity should prompt. The punishment for such conduct can hardly be too severe; but captains will always be found to risk it on the chance of saving their own certificate and their owners’ money. In 1873, for instance, the Spanish steamer Murillo ran down the British ship Northfleet off Dungeness, and cruelly left in defiance of signals, rockets, bluelights, and the shouts and screams of the whole ship’s company. In consequence the Northfleet, went down, with a loss of over three hundred souls.
It is always pleasant to hear of a case in which one of these rascals is caught and punished, as Mr. John Whitear, of the schooner Jehu, caught and punished the skipper of the American barque Jit.no. The story is told by Mr. Clark Russell* and wo have permission to give it in his own words.
" I was amused and interested some time since by hearing the story of the resolute behaviour of Mr. John Whitear, master of the schooner Jehu, a vessel of about 150 tons. Giving chase, if you can, is one way, at least, of clearing
• “ Round the Galley Fire,” by W. Clark Russell. London: Chatto & Wind us, 1890.
Digitized by GOOQle
390
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
up the mystery of the paternity of an offending ship that sneaks off in the darkness in th® hope of saving her owners pocket. Any way, Mr. John Whitear's conduct illustrates a spirit pleasant to come across in the homely prosaics of the marine life of to-day. Eighty and a hundred years ago it was men of the stamp of Mr. Whitear who commanded British privateers: otherwise how should the maritime memorials of that kind of vessel be so full as they are of the unflinching obstinacy and the grim courage which followed the fleeing enemy over leagues and leagues of ocean, through storms and through calms, finally overhauling and boarding the breathless chase in latitudes so remote from the point of departure that the span between the two places might even now be reckoned a long voyage?
“ Not very many days ago, then, the Jehu, with 230 tons of coal aboard, was quietly jogging along on her way to her port of destination The afternoon had been fine, and the night ckme down very clear and bright, with starlight. The water was smooth, though a merry wind was blowing, and the little vessel under easy canvas lay softly leaning in the gloom, with the white water rippling and crisping past her sides in a hollow, brass-like tinkling. Starlight gives beauty even to a coalman; and I have known stump topgallant masts and sails yawning upon sheets hard upon a fathom from the. points in the yard-arms through which they lead, make as dream-like and dainty a picture in the tender, sobering shadows of the night as the tall and tapering rig of the handsomest yacht now afloat.
“ At all events, the Jehu was Mr. John Whitear’s sea-home, and as ho paced tho weather side of the deck, sometimes squinting into the windward darkness where the loom of the land hung low upon the vague greyish softness of the water that way, or sometimes aloft where the stars, like so many benign and encouraging eyes, were tipping him cheerful winks through the black squares in the shrouds and over the main gaff' and among the dim tracery of the standing and running rigging, whose heights seemed to bring near the sweeping enfoldment of the glittering heavens, as though the vast star-laden shadow were revolving and was weaving its circling burden of gloom closer and closer yet round the lonely schooner journeying slowly along with a bell-liko resonance of broken water around her, he was, no doubt, as well satisfied with his little hooker as the captain of an ocean steamer could be with his stately ship.
"His pipe being smoked out, the weather looking as steady as a church, and all being well in every possible sense of that marine expression, Mr. Jolin Whitear thought that no harm could cornc of his going below for a spell to take some rest. Accordingly, after exchanging a few* words with his mates and taking another good look to windward and then aloft, he walked to the companion and disappeared down the steps. But, instead of going to bed like a landsman, he kept on his boots and his coat, merely removing his cap as a preliminary to turning in, and stretching himself upon a locker, within easy
Digitized by
Google
THE JEHU EUN DOWN.
391
hearing of the first shout that should come down through the companion, he closed his eyes, and was presently contributing to the other creaking sounds raised in the plain and quaint little cabin by the occasional movements of the Jehu.
“ How it came about he could not say, not having been on deck at the time ; but whilst he lay dreaming such peaceful dreams as should visit a master mariner whose whole professional life is dedicated to the careful attention of the three L’s, he was suddenly aroused, and in some measure startled, by a loud and fearful cry in the companion of ‘ Below, there ■ here’s a barque running into us 1'
“ Fortunately, Mr. White ar had no occasion to stay to dress himself; in a breath he was up the ladder and on deck. The first thing he saw was a large barque on the port bow, apparently paying off, having just gone about. Fresh as he was from a deep sleep, Mr. Whitear had all his wits about him in a moment; and he immediately perceived that, let him do what he liked and shout as he would, a collision was unavoidable. The barque loomed up large and massive in the darkness. Her lights were as plainly to be seen as the stars, whilst the Jehu’s burned as brightly. The wind had freshened somewhat, and both vessels were heeling under it. All was silent aboard the barque—not the least sound could be heard; and in that thrilling and breathless moment all other noises took a startling distinctness—the washing of water, the creaking of spars, the squeak up in the darkness of a sheave upon a rusty pin. There is no sensation comparable to what is felt in the few minutes which elapse between the approach and shock of two meeting vessels. A railway collision gives you no time. If by chance you look out of the carriage window and see what is going to happen, before yon can sing out, the thing has come and is over. But a collision at sea furnishes you with leisure to think, to anticipate, and to make an agony of the disaster before it actually befalls you. Whichever way the helm of the Jehu had been jammed it would have been all the same; the barque was bound to come, and in a few moments there she was, with her bows towering like a clifi' over the low bulwarks of the well-freighted Jehu, her jib-boom and bowsprit arching across the little schooner’s deck like a great spear in the hand of a giant.
"The Jehu heeled over under the blow until the rail of her starboard bulwarks was flush with the water. The men came skurrying, half-naked, out of the forecastle, thinking she was sinking, and rushed aft to be out of the way of whatever might tumble down from aloft. You beard the grinding noise of crushed wood, the thud of falling gear, the tearing of canvas. The weight of the barque, that was a big vessel in ballast, swept the stern of the little Jehu to windward, rounding her in such a manner as to free them both. But by this time there was plenty of noise and activity to be noted aboard the barque. Orders were rattled out in plain English, and you could hear tho scampering of feet and the songs of the seamen as they ran to and fro and
Digitized by Goode
392
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
pulled and hauled. She heeled over like a great shadow, with her main-yards square and her fore-sheets flattened in. It was impossible to know what mischief she had done; and, running to the side, Mr. Whitear shouted to her at the top of his voice to stand by them, as he feared the schooner was
SIMUSO or THE XORTUfLEKT (/• W).
sinking.
“No answer was returned.
'“They’re leaving us! ’ cried the mate. ‘ Look ! they’re trimming sail; they’re swinging the mainyards! ’
“Again Mr. Whitear bawled to them not to abandon the schooner; but no answer was vouchsafed, and in a few moments
it was not only seen that she was leaving them, but that she meant to get away as fast as she could, for they loosed their foretopgallant-sail and main-royal, and sheeted the canvas home with all expedition.
“Under such circumstances most men would have contented themselves
with bestowing a sea-blessing on the stranger, and then turned-to to sound the well, and if the schooner was leaking fast, get the boats over. But Mr. John Whitear was made of the old, and, as some people might think, the right kind of stuff.
“‘Bill,’ says he to William Dart, A.B., who was at the wheel, ‘keep your eye upon that old catermerang while me and the mate overhauls the schooner. Follow her without a wink. William ; for if there's a creak left in this old bucket, we'll stick to her skirts and have her name, though she should go all on sailing till we comes to Australey.’
“ Forthwith he and the mate went to work, sounded the well, looked over the side, peered at the damage done aloft; and then, coming aft again, * She’s tight and she right, boys,’ said Mr. Whitear. ‘ Now, bullies, here's a mess that’s to cost someone pounds and pounds. That someone’s not to be John Whitear; so, William, starboard your helm, my lad; and the rest of ye all turn to and make sail forrard, every stitch ye can find, and then we’ll repair the main rigging, and get a new main-sail bent;’ for he had
Digitized by
Google
CAPTAIN WHITEAR MEANS TO FOLLOW.
393
discovered that the barque’s jib-boom had cut through the centre cloths of the main-sail, ripping it open from the head to the second reef-band as neatly as if a sailmaker’s knife had done the job.
“ They all went to work with a will, putting uncommon agility into their limbs and spirits by calling the shadow ahead many hard salt names, and swearing they would catch her if she carried them into tho Polar regions. The labour was severe, for there were not many of them to 'turn to ’; nevertheless, they managed, in a time less by three-quarters than they would have occupied on any other occasion, to repair the damaged shrouds, set up preventer backstays, bend a new mainsail, and cover the little vessel with canvas. Tho barque was close-hauled, three or four miles ahead, on the port tack, lying over, as a light vessel will in such a merry breeze as was then blowing, under both royals and gaff topsail; she was trusting to her heels and running away, like a big bully from a little man whom he has accidentally hurt, and is afraid of. Her
“ STARLIGHT GIVES BEA LTV EVES TO A COALMAN ” <p. 390).
people would probably ridicule the idea of the deep-freighted schooner chasing them; indeed, they had left her apparently helpless, her port main rigging
Digitized by
Google
394 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
hanging in bights over the side, her mainsail in halves, and the whole fabric looking wrecked and stunned from the shock of the collision,
“ Meanwhile, Mr. John Whitear stumped the quarter-deck of his little craft, often pausing to point an old leather-covered telescope at the leaning shadow out away under the low-shining stars, just the merest trifle to leeward of the lee knighthead, and then, cocking the glass under his arm afresh, and swinging round with a sharp, obstinate stamp of the foot to resume his walk.
“ ‘ Boys,’ he sung out, ‘ there’s no occasion for the watch below to remain on deck.'
“ ‘ No, no,’ was the gruff’ answer; ‘ there’s no going below till we’ve found out that vessel’s name.’
“The wind came along with a fresh, strong sweep, and a deep moan in the gusts as they blew over the bulwark rail into the hollow glimmer of the great mainsail; there was a kind of flashful light in the breaking heads of the little surges, and a regular rise and fall of fountain-liko sound from forward, where the stem of the driven schooner was hissing through the dark water, and the wake ran away astern like a snow-covered road, until, looking at it, you seemed to see the dark water on either side stand up as if the white vein were the frothing stream of a cataract rushing into darkness betwixt the shadows of hills.
“ ‘ Why, smother me, if she’s not got the scent of us !' suddenly cried Mr, Whitear, with the glass at his eye; ' she’s off three points, and there’s no luff left in her! Boys, did. any of you take notice if she had her stun-sail booms aloft ? ’
“ * No,’ answered William Dart; ' her foreyards were just up yonder ’ (pointing into the air), ‘an’ I’ll take my oath she’d got no booms on ’em.’
‘“Then well run her down yet; well have her!’ cried Mr. Whitear, fetching his knee a slap that sounded like the report of a pistol. ‘ Keep her away a bit; ease off the sheets fore and aft. Hurrah, my lads! the Jehu, knows the road! We’ll weather the sneak, boys! ’ And so he rattled on, sometimes talking to his men, sometimes to the schooner, and sometimes addressing the barque ahead.
“ Shortly after two o’clock in the morning, however, four or five sailing-vessels hove in sight and bothered Mr. Whitear exceedingly, for there was a chance of mistaking the chase among them and pursuing the wrong vessel. All hands were implored to keep a bright look-out, and the glass was now much more often at the skipper’s eye than under his arm. It is strange enough to think of a little collier with 230 tons of coal in her bottom pursuing a vessel three times her size. It might really pass as a most satirical travesty of the old maritime business, were it not for the very strong com-mereial instincts at work in it. The purse was always as great a power on sea as on land, and the flight of the big barque from the little coalman was only another illustration of its supremacy.
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE CHASE OF THE BIG BARQUE.
395
“ To the great satisfaction of Mr. Whitear, the schooner turned out to be more than a match for the cowardly runaway. It was quite clear that the barque had no more sail to set; as it was, she was bowling along under a press of canvas that must have made her decks mighty uncomfortable, to judge from the sharp angle of her inclination. Had she chosen to put her helm up and bring the wind well aft, she would no doubt have walked away from the schooner, whose fore-and-aft canvas then would not have much helped her. But the barque could not forget that she had to work her way to windward, and that her port lay N.E and not S.W.; and though she might slacken away her lee-braces in the hope of making the obstinate little schooner give up, it would not answer her purpose to do more than that
“Inch by inch the Jehu crawled up to her. Just before daybreak the wind breezed up like a squall, though the sky was clear, and Mr. Whitear, who all through the night had watched the chase with the intentness of an old British commodore following a squadron of flying Frenchmen, shouted out that she had taken in her royals and gaff topsail, and that, as it was, she was nearly out of water to windward. But not so much as a ropeyarn was touched aboard the Jehu; she had never been so pressed since the hour that she was launched. She hove up the foam as high as the head-boards; every bone of her trembled; the wind boomed away from under the foot of her sails in a thunder-note, and the sheets and the weather-standing rigging stood like bars of iron. There seemed as much eagerness in her shivering, rushing frame as in her skipper, whose excitement deepened as the square and leaning shadow ahead loomed bigger and bigger. Earnestly was it to be hoped that the port main rigging would stand all this straining; and yet such was the temper of the captain and the men of the brave little Jehu that, I believe, had the mainmast gone overboard, they would have held on after the barque with a single spar, just as I once saw a man with one arm and a wooden leg give chase to a rogue who had sneered at his misfortunes. ,
“The faint grey of the dawn was in the sky when the barque was brought to the wind again, and, after holding on for a short while with a close luff, went about Before she had her foreyards braced round, the schooner had stayed and was on the starboard tack, savagely breaking the quick seas which were rolling in the wake of the wind, and finding all the advantage she needed in tho weathering she had made upon the barque, who, with the rising of the sun, appeared to lose all heart, for no more sail was made; and when she was braced up, she was kept so close that the weather half of her foro top-gallantsail was aback. The white sunshine that had flung a deep blue over the stars, and transformed the ocean into a tumbling green surface full of sparkles and white lines, and a horizon so clear that it was like the sweep of a brush dipped in bright green paint along the enfolding azure of the morning sky, gave stout-hearted Mr. John Whitcar a good sight of the tall vessel he had been chasing all through the middle and morning watches. She was what he called
Digitized by GOOQle
396
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
M WITH HEM BOWS TOWEKIXG’’ (P- 3UI).
' a lump of a barque ’ — so light that half her metal sheathing was out of water, with very square yards and a main sky-sail mast, and she tumbled with such unwieldy motions upon the running seas that it seemed no longer wonderful that the Jehu should have been able to weather and
forereach upon her. Her way was almost stopped by the gripe of her luff, and within an hour of the time of her going about the schooner was on her weather quarter.
“ Mr. Whitear had already deciphered her name upon her stern, but he had some questions to ask; so, jumping on the rail and clawing a backstay with one hand, whilst he put the other hand to his mouth, he bawled out: ‘ Barque, ahoy I ’
“ ' Hallo ’ ’ was the answer.
" ‘ What's the name of your vessel ? ’ sang out Mr. Whitcar.
'“Have you forgotten how to read, skipper? It’s under your nose, came the reply.
Digitized by^OOQlC
CAPTAIN WHITEAR TRIUMPHS.
397
“' You're the barque Juno, of Maitland, U.S.—that’s clear enough on your starn,’ shouted Mr. Whitear, whose temper, inflamed by ■ the long pursuit, was not improved, as may be supposed, by this reception; 1 and you’re the vessel that ran into us last night, and carried away our shrouds, braces, and running gear, the main-rail, top-gallant bulwarks, and split our mainsail.”
” ‘ No, we ain’t,’ was the reply. ‘ We know nothing of the job you’re talking about; so sheer off, will ye, and take care to spot the right party afore letting fly.'
" Without answering, Mr, Whitear shifted his helm so as to bring his vessel to leeward of the barque; and then, running forward when the schooner had forged abreast of the other vessel, he shouted to the man who had answered his hail to look over the port bow of the barque, and there he would seo the marks of the schooner’s chain-plate bolts, whilst further evidence of the barque being the culprit lay in particles of her planking adhering to the Jehu’s chain-plates. This was too decisive to admit of further denial; and Mr. John Whitear having obtained all the information lie required, walked aft again, once more shifted his helm, saluted the barque with a farewell flourish of his
“THEY MANAGED ... TO REPAIR THE DAMAGED RJIROVOfi” (p- 393)-
fist, and then gave orders to his men to trim sail and head for the port to which they were bound.”
Of all the forms of shipwreck, however, by far the commonest is that of a ship striking on dry land. Waterspouts are but rare, and hurricanes may
Digitized by LnOOQle
398
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
be ridden through, provided there be plenty of sea-room. No doubt the increase of steam over sail has added to the apparent and even the actual dangers of bad weather at sea. As a recent writer puts it, “ A steamer plunges into a head-sea in a blundering sort of way, wallowing from side to side as she does so, and shipping water to the port or starboard in the most uncertain manner. The power which drives the great hull against the rolling masses of water seems to have no sympathy with either the ship or the waves; and, drenched from stem to stern, the vessel reels and staggers on her way, kept only to her work by careful use of helm. Now the sailing-vessel meets a head-sea, when lying-to under easy canvas, as though she knew just what to do with it She is at one, so to speak, with tho whole matter. Her long, tapering spars act pendulum-like, chocking all sudden or jerky rolling; and as long as a stitch of canvas can be set, she meets the waves in a give-and-take way, reminding one of the ' soft answer that turneth away wrath.’ ”
But ships will not always keep, even if they can have, plenty of sea-room. They are perpetually tempted to keep too close into shore, in order to make a shorter passage. It is said that if the steamers running between Liverpool and New York would only lengthen their course by a couple of days, the risk they now run from collision with icebergs would be almost entirely avoided. But the public insists upon being taken in the shortest possible time, and at the least possible cost, from one point to another; and so long as it does so, so long will the temptation exist to make short cuts, often at great risk.
A sailing vessel, caught by a sudden change of wind, with the land close under her lee, may find it impossible to beat out into the open sea again; and, be the vessel worked by steam or sail, she must depend on her compass; and compasses are liable to error; and an error in the compass increases in seriousness with the nearness of a vessel to the coast. It was a deviation of tho compass that, in 1804, wrecked the Apollo frigate and forty merchantmen of her convoy on the coast of Portugal, when they believed themselves to be a hundred miles to the westward. In December, 1811, the line-of-battle ship Defence, of seventy-four guns, was lost oft' the coast of Jutland, with 587 men; and in the same year, the Hero, of seventy-four guns, was wrecked in almost the same place, with the total loss of her crew of 590 hands. Again defective compasses were at the bottom of the mischief. The same cause led to the wreck of the Reliance, East Indiaman,. on the French coast in 1842, when 109 lives were lost; and to the more recent unhappy wreck in 1889 of H.M.S. Serpent on the Spanish coast More famous, however, than any of these— though its renown arises rather from tho behaviour of its crew than the circumstances of its loss—is the wreck of the Birkenhead troop-ship, a wreck which occurred in calm weather, and was brought about simply by shaving the land too close in order to make a shorter passage.
At the southern extremity of the African continent, and about midway between the Cape of Good Hope and the Cape LAgulhas, lies a promontory
Digitized by Google
THE BIRKENHEAD.
399
called Danger Point, a great height of cliff, cut sheer as by a chisel. And close to Danger Point lies a rock cal led-Birkenhead Rock; and the history of the name is this.
On the 7th of January, 1852, the Birkenhead, an iron paddle-wheel troopship, of 1,400 tons and 556 horse-power (Captain Robert Salmond), sailed out of Cork Harbour. Her orders yvere to proceed to the Cape of Good Hope with drafts from various regiments, under the command of Colonel Seton of the 74th Highlanders, now the second battalion of the Highland Light Infantry. With her crew, she carried a complement of 638 souls.
Heavy weather went with her until she reached Madeira; afterwards it improved ; but she did not reach Cape Town until Monday, the 23rd of February —a tedious voyage. At Cape Town, Captain Salmond received orders to proceed at once to Algoa Bay, and accordingly at six o'clock on Wednesday evening, the 25th, the Birkenhead weighed anchor and steamed off to the eastward. February is summer time at the Cape; and this particular evening fell in calm and clear, a multitude of stars shedding a soft light around—enough to keep the coast distinctly visible, three or four miles away on the port bow of the Birkenhead, as she moved through the water at the rate of nine knots an hour or thereabouts. The coast was badly lit then; it is badly lit to-day. But here and there a light could be seen from some farmhouse, or a fire burning steadily on the hills in the windless night. On the sea, a long, regular swell heaved shore wards. On the Birkenhead the look-out men were at their stations, and the leadsman stood on the port paddle-box, and called the soundings at intervals. Below, the ship slept.
At a quarter to two in the morning the leadsman on the paddle-box got soundings in twelve fathoms. He was Icisurably preparing his lead for a new cast, when at ten minutes to two a shock flung him forward on his face, and with a crash the Birkenhead drove upon a sunken rock, with deep water all round.
The rock penetrated her bottom, just aft of the foremast; and in an instant the water poured into the fore part of the ship, drowning at once in their hammocks a number of sailors who were asleep on the lower troop-deck. The officers ran quickly upon deck, but there was no kind of panic.
Captain Salmond’s first step was to find out the course that had been steered. This was reported as S.S.E. | E., which, he said, was correct. He then stopped the engines, let go an anchor, and gave orders to get out the paddle-box and quarter boats and bring them alongside. Meantime Colonel Seton called his officers about him, and impressed upon them the necessity of keeping order and silence among the men, who were told to fall in on both sides of the quarter-deck.
Sixty soldiers, under Lieutenant Lucas of the 73rd, were at once detailed to work the chain pumps, in three reliefs. Sixty others were told off to hold on the tackles of the paddle-box boats and help the sailors in lowering them;
Digitized by GOOQle
400
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
a third sixty were employed in pitching the horses overboard; and the rest of the men were kept on the poop, so as to ease the fore part of the ship, which was now rolling heavily in the long slow swell.
The men went about their work in perfect order.
Tt now, most unhappily, occurred to the captain to order the engines full speed astern. The engines made some eighteen revolutions, with the result of dislodging
“MB BAWLID OTT; ' BaWU B, AHOr!’" IP 3914).
the ship from the point of rock on which she had been wedged, when she struck again heavily, this time crashing in her side, and ripping open her hull under the engine-room. The water now rushed in in a flood and at once extinguished the fires, the engineers and stokers escaping with great difficulty and amid clouds of steam to the upper deck.
Tlie ship was now seen to be doomed; and Captain Salmond’s first thought was for the women and children. He quietly ordered Mr. Richards, the master’s assistant, to take charge of the second cutter and reserve it for them alone; and with the same composure Colonel Seton drew his sword and took
his stand by the gangway, to prevent, if necessary, any of the men from crowding into the boat. The necessity did not arise. The women and children were got into the boat, and she pushed off, her rowers having orders to lie on their oars as soon as they were 150 yards from the ship.
No sooner were the women and children thus provided for than the Birkenhead began to break up rapidly. Within ten minutes of the time that she first struck, the water was up to her hatchways ; and just five minutes later she literally broke in two at the foremast, her fore part sinking at once, her bows coming straight up, with the bowsprit pointing towards the foremast. Almost at the same moment the foremast went and the funnel fell over the starboard side, crushing a number of people on deck, carrying away the starboard paddle-box, and knocking the men off the starboard paddle-box boat into the water
Digitized by LnOOQle
" COLONEL SETON .... TOOK HIS STAND BY THE GANGWAY ’’ (p. 100).
26
Digitized by LnOOQle
402
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
There had not been time to lower either of the paddle-box boats; and the largest boat of all, the pinnace, which had been stowed amidships, was so encumbered that it could not be got at: the only available boats, therefore, were the two quarter boats and the gig. The fore part of the ship being gone, the remainder began to settle down forward, the stern being gradually lifted high in the air. Hie survivors crowded upon the poop and stood awaiting the end. Word was passed that all who could swim should try to save themselves, and thereupon one solitary voice cried out, “Make for the boats!” Colonel Seton at once lifted a hand and implored the men on no account to make for the boat that contained the women and children; and to their credit not one of them, even in that terrible hour, made any attempt to swim for that boat and endanger its safety.
The officers now shook hands and were wishing one another good-bye, when suddenly the ship parted again—this time just abaft the mainmast—the poop toppled over to starboard, pitching all who stood upon it into the sea, and the Birkenhead disappeared—all but her main-topmast and main-topsail yard, which still stood out of the water, and to which a few fortunate people managed to swim and cling. Among the drowning crowd were Colonel Seton and Captain Salmond. The fonner was never seen again; the latter was observed to be swimming for a plank, when a falling spar struck him on the head and he, too, disappeared for ever.
Several people were picked up by the boats, and a few managed, with the aid of lifebelts or broken spars, to struggle ashore and land on Point Danger. But many even of the ablest swimmers perished; for the sea was swarming with sharks, and among the most pitiful incidents of this pitiful wreck were the cries of those swimmers who were seized by these monsters almost within reach of land. It is worth noting, on the evidence of one of the survivors, Lieutenant Giradot, of the 43rd Regiment, that nearly all those who swain naked were taken by the sharks, while the most of those who swam with their clothes on escaped.
Another soldier, Cornet Bond, of the 12th Lancers, relates that he was on poop when she heeled over and flung him into the sea. He wore a lifebelt which he managed to inflate in the water, and he reached the shore at about five in the morning, after swimming and floating for three hours. Two men, who for a long time swam by his side, threw up their arms and disappeared, being probably bitten by sharks. When Mr. Bond came close to the shore, he found the seaweed so thick that it was all he could do, in his exhausted state, to force a way through it. When at last ho set foot upon firm ground, the first thing he saw was his own horse quietly standing there and waiting for him. He was one out of five of all the horses that succeeded in swimming ashore. In all, sixty-eight people managed to swim to dry land; but it is likely that quite as many more were cither taken by the sharks or entangled in the mass of seaweed off the beach and drowned. The three boats had on board another
Digitized byViOOQlC
SPLENDID DISCIPLINE.
403
seventy-eight persons, and, fearing to attempt a landing through the breakers, they headed for Cape Town and pulled away for some hours in fairly smooth water; but towards daybreak a stiff breeze sprang up. On board the second cutter (that containing the women and children), a woman’s shawl was rigged out on a boat-hook, and served as a sail. About seven in the morning, a small coasting schooner was descried and hailed; and soon, to their vast relief, she was observed to be bearing down to them.
She proved to be the Lioness, bound from Cape Town; and after taking on board the people from the boats, she ran on for tho scene of the wreck. She reached it soon after two in the afternoon, and found the mainmast still standing, with some forty-five poor fellows clinging to it in the last state of exhaustion. These were quickly taken on board, and tho Lioness at once got under way for Simon’s Bay, where she arrived that same evening.
The sufferings of those who swam to shore, and their weary tramp through a country covered with thick thorn-bushes, have been often told; and the circumstances of the wreck of the Birkenhead are still quoted as among tho most splendid instances of heroic discipline in our annals. The loss of life was enormous—the total number on board the Birkenhead at the time she struck being 631, of whom 440 were lost; while the saved in all were but 191. But no woman or child was lost. Captain Wright, in his official report of the wreck, said:—
“ Colonel Seton issued his commands with as much coolness and presence of mind as if he had been on parade.
“ Everyone did as he was directed.
“ All received their orders, and had them carried out, as if the men were embarking instead of going to the bottom. There was only this difference —that I never saw any embarkation conducted with so little noise or confusion.”
It was, of course, a fatal mistake for Captain Salmond to back his ship off tho rock. Had he allowed her to remain, the rock itself, filling part of the hole it had made, might have kept the ship afloat till all the boats could have been launched. But, of course, the initial mistake was made in keeping the Birkenhead too close in. Curiously and sadly enough, one of the Union Company’s steamships, the Teuton, was totally lost, a few years ago, in almost the same spot and from the very same cause. The necessity of giving this particular part of the coast a wide berth is the more imperative because it is so badly lighted. In the 900 miles of hazardous navigation between Paternoster Point and Port Natal there are only thirteen coast lights; and, chiefly in consequence of this neglect, the interest of this seaboard is found in the most melancholy stories of shipwreck. “ I do not want,” says Mr. Clark Russell, “ to contrast the English with the South African coast; but I cannot help noticing that in two hundred and sixty-five miles of English seaboard you have thirteen lights, all of a brilliant specific character—not to mention the innumerable
Digitized by LnOOQle
404
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
illuminations of harbours and so forth; whilst there are only thirteen lights, many of them bad, in nine hundred miles of perilous coast incessantly skirted by mail and other steamers and sailing vessels, carrying in the course of a year thousands of lives and freights of an enormous aggregate value! I will briefly describe the lighting hereabout in the hope of emphasising to the Colonial Government ear the urgent cry of the mariner who has to do business at the South African ports. Starting from Paternoster Point, you steer along seventy miles before you come to Robben Light. Then, from Cape Point Light you steam past eighty-five miles of frowning current-ridden and shoal-laden coast before arriving at Cape Agulhas Lighthouse. Then on through another hundred and twenty miles of blackness to Cape St. Blaize, where you find a feeble red light that ceases to be deceptive only when it is invisible. Then past one hundred and thirty miles of malignant coast to Cape St. Francis, beyond which there is an interval as far as Cape Recife of forty-five miles of lampless seaboard. Then, far to the north-east is Bird Island Light, another red and almost worthless signal, unwisely affirmed to be visible ten to twelve miles distant, and designed to guard the mariner against one of the most deadly of the many deadly points of this coast. Another thirty miles bring you to a green light at the mouth of the Kowie River— a light of miserable character, reckoned to be visible six miles. After sixty-five miles more of blackness, you make East London Light, and then, until you reach Port Natal, you must steam a distance of no less than two hundred and fifty miles without witnessing any other illumination on shore than the dangerous and misleading bush-fires.”
There are, nevertheless, occasions when a ship must keep close to the shore with its attendant risks. For, obviously, a ship must come to harbour sooner or later, and most harbours have a knack of forming a bar at their entrance, over which the seas run wildly in certain winds, and through which navigation is often difficult, even with a chart. In most cases, of course, a ship’s captain will wait for a local pilot to take him in, even if he be not absolutely obliged to by law. But in dirty weather he must sometimes run for shelter into such a harbour through seas in which a pilot-boat cannot venture to pull out; or again, he may have to make the entrance at night, when no pilot happens to be on the watch It was for lack of pilots that Captain William Watson, whose acquaintance we have already made as a blockade-runner, was obliged to make the crossing of the bar at Tampico: and again we are allowed to give the narrative of his adventure in his own words. He was blockaderunning as usual, and after escaping the enemy's gun-boats and a dangerous hurricane, found himself off Tampico bar, which he must cross to get into the river and reach Tampico Town.
" We found anchored there,” he says, “ two vessels both schooners. One of them was just such a vessel as the Sylvia, which we had met here six months before, and, like her, was from St, John with a cargo of lumber for
Digitized by GOOQle
TAMPICO BAR.
405
Tampico. The other was a larger vessel, but she seemed light, as in ballast, and was anchored further out.
“ The former vessel we sailed up to and spoke. I cannot now remember her name, but will call her the St. John, as she was from that port She had passed to the south of Cuba, and came in from the eastward, and had experienced nothing of the gale, but judged from the swell from the northward
“THE MAINMAST STILL STANDING” (P- 403/
that there had been a heavy gale in that direction. They drew about six feet of water, and they wished to cross the bar and go up to Tampico Town.
flic pilots boat had
been off in the morning, but it was impossible to Digitized by Google
406
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
take them over the bar at that time owing to the very high sea caused by the heavy swell from the northward, meeting in the channel the strong current of the Tampico River, which was then very high owing to great floods in the interior. The pilots had promised, however, to come out again in the afternoon, when, if the swell had gone down a little, they would be able to take them over.
“ As this bar at Tampieo is of shifting quicksand, the channel through it keeps constantly changing, and it is necessary for the pilots to take soundings regularly—almost every day. It is sometimes very crooked and difficult to pass through, and if a vessel gets on to the shoal it is generally a total loss, and if it should be rough weather it is often attended with the loss of ail hands, as no boat can live in the breakers. The entrance to this channel from seaward was supposed at this time to be about half a mile to the southward of where it was when we were here six months before, but it was very difficult to define the exact place.
“ As the pilots had promised to take over in the afternoon the St. John, which drew six feet of water, I conceived they could have no difficulty with the Rob Roy, which drew only four feet nine inches. We, therefore, dropped anchor and signalled for a pilot. After waiting about an hour there was no appearance of any pilot-boat coming off, and the sky had suddenly changed, and towards the north-east looked black and threatening. This was alarming,
“Anyone who knows anything of Tampieo Roads knows what a dangerous place it is in a heavy north-easterly wind. A very high sea sets in, and with such violence that no amount of ground-tackling will hold the vessel; and I have known large steamers with both anchors down and working propellers at full speed scarce able to hold against it and keep off the breakers, while with a sailing vessel it is impossible to claw off
“ As soon as I saw this appearance of a change in the weather I set about getting the anchor up to try and get out to sea, and I saw the other vessels doing the same, but it was too late. We had scarcely got sails set when it was down upon us. We set every bit of canvas, and gave full centre-board to see if wo could weather the reefs to the southward,, but we soon saw that we could not clear them on that stretch, and we tacked and stood to the northward as far as we could reach for the breakers, and then stood back to try again to weather the reefs to the southward; but to our dismay we found that we had not gained an inch, and the sea was now getting up and throwing us more to leeward, and we saw that the other two vessels were not making any more of it than ourselves.
“ This was something terrible to realise so suddenly and unexpected. To leeward and on each side were the shoals which hemmed us in, and on them the mountainous waves broke with great fury ; to windward were the threatening clouds which betokened a heavy gale, and coming it was with certainty, and not the slightest chance of a lull or change in the wind, and night Digitized by Goode
A DESPERATE RESOLVE.
407
coming on. The gale did not come on with such violence as on the previous day, but it mattered little in the position we were in; it was sufficient to bring on our destruction, and that with certainty and in a very short time, and what would we not have given for the same sea-room we had last night, even with the gale in all its fury I
“What to do I did not know. The men looked at me, but no one spoke. I pointed to the deck-load of cotton.
“ ‘ Men,’ said I, ' the charge of every life is mine. Do you think it would help us any to throw over that deck-load ? If you think so, we will throw it over at once.’
“ ‘It will do no good/ they cried out together; 'it coses her aloft and gives her a better hold on the water; and if at last we go on the bar there is a chance of saving our lives by clinging to bales of cotton.’
“' Then/ said I, ‘ we cannot claw off. The gale is increasing, night is upon US, and, do our best, we will be in these breakers before an hour. Now, I propose to make an attempt to run the gauntlet. I have been observing with the glass, and I fancy I see what I take to be the opening to the channel, and I propose to make the attempt to cross the bar. I know it is a desperate and dangerous undertaking, but it is the only chance for our lives. What do you all say?’
"‘ I say try it/ said the mate; ‘it is our only chance/
" The men all acquiesced, and said they were ready to obey.
“ One man then spoke up, and said: ‘ I am ready to leave it to your own judgment. Captain; but, if you take my advice, when crossing you will steer through where you see the highest seas and the bluest water.’
" ‘ I believe you are right/ I said, ‘ and I intend to do so.’
" Father Ryan, who stood with an expression something between composure and anxiety on his countenance, looked at me seriously and said, ‘ Try it, Captain, and may the hand of God guide you.’
“ For once at least in my life, I implored the aid of a higher hand. I went to the cabin and took the chronometer and cushioned it in one of the beds, as is usually done in crossing bars, in case of a sudden touch on the ground shaking it, and, going on deck, told the men that everything now depended upon their coolness and prompt action.
“ The greatest difficulty in crossing a bar through a narrow channel before a heavy sea was to keep the vessel straight in the channel, and prevent her stern being swung round by the heavy seas rolling up astern. In placing tho men, the first point to be determined was, who was the best steersman. This was accorded to Hagan. To the cook was assigned the charge of the centreboard, the bar of which, being near the door of the galley, he had been accustomed to work and lower or raise as required The mate would take charge aft, with another man at the peak purchase, and be ready to drop the peak of the mainsail if a heavy scrolling up astern, swung her stern round;
Digitized by
Google
408
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
while two men would be stationed at the jib-sheet to
haul to windward and
make her pay off, and I would take my station on the top of the cotton amidships, and with my glass look out ahead for the best water, and direct with my hand to the right or left the course to steer. The helmsman would
keep his eye on me and steer by the direction of my hand The mate would
also be ready to assist the man at the
helm, or to take the helm
in case of
the steersman being knocked down by a heavy sea Father Ryan wished to know where he could be of
“the men looked at mb” <J- 407X
coming over the stern, service. I directed him to watch the companion doors, and keep them shut to prevent a sea going down in the cabin.
“ The most important part was to find the proper entrance to the channel; and we were now approaching the place which I supposed to be the entrance, and as soon as it was under our lee the gaff-topsail was taken in, but everything else was carried full
" Every man now took his place, and I got upon the top of the cotton with my glass, and directed with
my hand. As we approached the place, it looked awful; the waves toppled up like the walls of a fortress. Sheets were eased off, and under a full pressure of canvas the vessel rushed at it. She plunged violently; every spar and timber seemed to quiver. There was evidently a strong current against her, while the tremendous seas breaking on each side seemed above our heads. Sometimes I thought we were completely locked in, but still some higher and bluer waves gave indication of the deepest water. Sometimes a tremendous sea would come rolling up astern and throw her stem forward and bring her almost broadside on across the channel; but the peak would be quickly dropped, and jib hauled to windward, and she payed off again before another sea came, when the same thing was repeated. We were nearly to the midst of it, but we were not making fast progress owing to the strong current of the river against us. This, however, made her steer better.
Digitized by
Google
CROSSING THE BAR,
409
and convinced me that we were in the right channel; but I feared that the shallowest and worst-defined part of it would be the end next the shore, and often the flying spray blinded me and dimmed the glass in my hand, so that I had to keep wiping it with my handkerchief. I could only see ahead when
lifted on the top of a huge wave, as, when that passed on, the
that the water was getting shallower on
" THE VESSEL HUSKED AT IT ” O’- 4031
each side, the breakers worse, and the channel less defined. When looking forward, my eye caught the shore in the distance, and I saw a Mexican flag —the pilot’s flag—and I saw they were waving directions. First inclined to the north, we altered course to the north, then held up straight—steady; then inclined to the south, we altered course to the south, then up straight again —steady.
“I had now some hopes. We continued on, and soon after all in front
Digitized by LnOOQle
410 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
seemed breakers, and I saw no appearance of a channel or deep water; but the pilot's Hag was held up steady to come straight on. It looked fear fid, but on we must go. Several heavy broken waves came up, two of which came over our stern. Another heavier one camo up, and, nearly burying us, carried us forward some distance, and when it passed she touched the ground, but it was just lightly and for a moment. She payed off again. Another heavy and broken wave followed, and a violent gust of wind at the same time carried us along through a mass of foam into the deep and smooth water inside the bar.
“ * Round her to, haul down staysail and jib, and let go anchor,’ said I.
“This was soon done. The men stood round, but said nothing. Father Ryan, whose hat had blown overboard, came up to me bareheaded, drenched with salt water, and with tears in his eyes. He grasped me warmly by the hand, and said seriously, ‘ Captain, the finger of God was there.’
‘“It was,’ I said; and I never said two words with more sincerity in all my life. Of the many incidents in my somewhat adventurous life, I do not think that any made a greater impression on me than the fortune of the last twenty-four hours, and especially this last hour.
“I now cast a look seaward to see what had become of the other two vessels. One, the St. John, having followed us, was within a hundred yards of us, and near the place where we had touched the ground. She was stranded, and the sea was breaking over her, and the men had taken to the rigging. The other vessel was nowhere to be seen. I ordered the men to get out the boat to seo if we could in any way render assistance to the crew of the St. John. I then went to the cabin for a few minutes. I found that a good deal of water had got down into the cabin, and some things were wet; but what was that, considering our providential deliverance ?
“When I returned on deck, the pilots’ boat and the customs’ boat were alongside. I rated the pilots for not coming off in the afternoon as they had promised to the St. John. They said it was impossible for a boat to go off during the day. When they went oft' in the morning there was some swell on the bar which they thought would go down, but it increased during the day, so that a boat could not cross the bar, and they supposed that there must have been a heavy gale to the northward. I said there had been a heavy gale, but it seemed not to have reached as far south as Tampico.
" I then asked if we could do anything for the crew of the St. John. They said that no boat could get to her just then, but there was a chance for both the vessel and crew, as she was in past the worst part of the bar, but the larger schooner was gone with all hands. She had struck near the outer end of the channel and disappeared almost immediately. The St. John had a very heavy deck-load of lumber, and, if they could get that off her, she would float off as the tide was making.
Digitized by LnOOQle
SAFE IN FORT.
411
“ They then made signs to , the St. John to throw off their deck-load, but it was dangerous for the men to come down from the rigging. The seas breaking over the vessel soon washed away the greater part of the deck-load, and the vessel floated and was driven further in, where she grounded again, but she was so near to the edge of the smooth water that, with the help of the floating lumber and our boat and that of the pilots, the men were all saved, although some of them were badly bruised.
“ I offered to take them up to Tampico Town, but they preferred to remain at the pilot-station to see about getting their vessel in over the bar, which they succeeded in doing about two days afterwards. Of the larger schooner nothing was ever seen, not a vestige of her could be discovered when the weather moderated. It was supposed she had been to Vera Cruz, where she had discharged her cargo and had come to Tampico to load with dye wood.
“ By the time the crew of the St. John had been picked up it was getting dark and blowing hard, and to seawards there was every indication of a heavy gale, and we were certainly very grateful that we had got safe inside of the bar. We took the advantage of the fair wind to run up the river to Tampico Town, which we were not long in accomplishing. The river was very high, and we anchored in front of the town.
“ Father Ryan now asked leave to offer a short thanksgiving for our safe arrival, which was appreciated
“ As no one had slept since the previous day, and it had been rather a trying twenty-four hours, I expected all hands would now be glad to get a little rest, but for this they were not the least inclined; there was the usual rejoicing at getting in. They thought of the dangers now past; the gale howled overhead, but they were now safe and snug in harbour, the voyage successfully ended. Big pay and bonus to receive, they sung and danced about, and said they thought the captain ought to treat them to champagne.
“ I told them I though t they should have more solemn thoughts, and express their inward gratitude to Heaven for their safety and preservation, and remember the fate of the poor men on the other vessels. They allowed all that, and said they were truly grateful for their preservation, and now that the danger was past they wished to drink my health and give me credit for my able management of the vessel during the trip.
“There is a good deal in fair words, and it requires a pretty strong-minded man to be always proof against them. The men had certainly done their duty, and I acknowledged it to them, and said I was willing to show my gratitude in any way that would not be injurious to them ; and, turning to Father Ryan, I said, ‘What do you say, Father Ryan’’
“The old man said he thought the men had done their duty well, and if
Digitized by Goode
412
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
they would only do it as well in keeping within moderation—which he thought he could answer they would—there would be no harm in my giving them a small treat.
“he grasped mt. warmly by the hand” (p. <1®.
“It was now past seven o'clock and dark, but there was already some boats alongside — ‘ Bummers ’—one of which had done business for us last voyage. I called the owner of this boat and wrote to a respectable restaurant which I knew, directing them to send off at once what would be necessary for a good supper for all hands, with some good champagne. In the meantime, the crew having got everything made snug and got their wet clothes shifted, the boat came alongside with the articles, and the men enjoyed themselves, and they were as good as their word, and kept within moderation. As I wished every man to get rest, I em-
ployed two men from the shore who had worked for us last voyage, and who I could depend upon, to keep anchor watch, and we all enjoyed a pleasant sleep that night."
Digitized by
CHAPTER XVII.
PERILS OF ICE AND FLAME.
H.MS. Guardian, and How She Struck upon an Iceberg—Riou'b Gallantry—Just Saved—The Two Letters Home — Meteors and Lightning — Coal-gas — The Ji. Ji. Fuller- — The Crew Watch Her Destruction from the Boats—An Outline in Fire—The Earl of Eldon—Narrative of a Passenger —The Cotton on Fire—Ship Despaired of—In the Boats—Sufferings on the Voyage to Rodriquo— Swamped by a Sea —Arrival at Rodriquo—The Caso of the Colombo—And that of the Fame — Sir Stamford Raffles’ Narrative.
ALTHOUGH collision with icebergs is not a common danger of navigation —and fortunately, since it is one that no chart can provide against— yet the story of the sea includes some terrible cases of this particular form of disaster. The tale of the Lady Hobart, which struck upon an iceberg off the Bank of Newfoundland, on the 26th of June, 1803, and of the subsequent sufferings of her crew, has been told too often to be repeated here. That of the Guardian is less familiar, perhaps.
The Guardian sloop, commanded by the gallant Lieutenant Riou (afterwards Captain Riou, who died gloriously at Copenhagen), was on her way from the Thames to Botany Bay with a crew of 123 persons, including 25 convicts. She was well stocked, too, with provisions for the small colony. Twelve days after touching at the Cape, on December 23rd, 1789, the vessel, being then in lat 44° S., and long. 41°30'E, a large iceberg was sighted through the haze. Lieutenant Riou gave orders to stand towards it that they might collect lumps of ice to supply the ship with water—their stock of which had run low, owing to the number of cattle on board. As the ship approached the island, the boats were hoisted out, and the Guardian lay-to while the supply was being brought on board.
Doubts of the vessel’s safety seem to have been in nobody’s mind; but the base of the iceberg happened to project a long way under water, and upon this, as she attempted to stand away, her bows struck. She instantly swung round, and her head cleared. But this brought her stern upon the shoal;
Digitized byVvOOQlC
414
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
where it struck repeatedly, and with such violence as to break away the rudder and shiver all the works abaft. In this situation the Guardian became embayed, as it were, under the terrific bulk of ice, the head of which—twice as high as the mainmast of a first-rater—threatened every moment to topple on their heads and crush them in the sea. By good fortune and after great exertions, they managed to work off the shoal, and the ice floated past them.
Upon Sounding, they found that the ship had six feet of water in her hold. All hands were immediately set to the pumps, and continued to work at them during the whole of the 24th, thereby reducing the leak considerably. They also endeavoured to lighten the ship; but, unfortunately, while he was engaged in this business, a cask fell back upon Lieutenant Riou, and bruised his hand so badly that he was unable to give any further assistance. At midnight the winch of the starboard pump broke, and at six o’clock on the morning of the 25th the leak had increased to seven feet. The night had also been tempestuous, and the wind had blown the fore- and main-topsails to pieces, leaving the ship entirely at the mercy of the sea This so disheartened the crew that they began to break off from the pumps and hide themselves, and it was only by threatening to throw them overboard that they could be kept to their duty. All this time they were ignorant of the true state of the ship, until one of the carpenters, stationed to sound the well, came up and reported that the water was as high as the orlop deck, and gaining above a foot every half-hour. The officers could not possibly repress this report, and many of the people, who were really unable to bear the fatigue any longer, immediately desponded and gave themselves up to perish with the ship. A few of the stronger men applied to the officers for the boats, which were ordered to be got in readiness; and the boatswain was directed to put the masts, sail, and compass in 'each. The cooper was also set to work to fill a few quarter-casks with water out of some of the butts on deck; and provisions and other necessaries were got up from the hold.
While they were making these preparations, Lieutenant Riou withdrew and penned the following letter to the Secretary of the Admiralty:—•
“ H.M.S. Guardian, December 25th, 1780.
“ Sib,—If any part of the officers and crew of the Guardian should ever get home, I have only to say that their conduct, after the fatal stroke on an island of ice, was admirable and wonderful in everything that relates to their duties, considered either as private men or in His Majesty’s service.
“ As there seems to be no possibility of my remaining many hours in this world, I beg leave to recommend to the consideration of the Admiralty a sister, together with a widowed mother, to whom their favour might be shown, if my conduct or services should bo found deserving of any remembrance.
“ I am, sir, with great respect,
“ Your ever obedient servant,
“ Philip Stevens, Esq.	* E. Riou.”
This letter Lieutenant Riou delivered to Mr. Clements, the master, with instructions to forward it to England, should the boats be fortunate enough to
Digitized by
Google
ACCIDENT TO THE GUARDIAN.
415
escape. “ As for me,” he said, “ I have determined to remain in the ship, and shall endeavour to make my presence useful ns long as there is any occasion for it.” And he remained firm to this resolution, in spite of the entreaties of all his officers. He showed himself, notwithstanding, as active in providing for the safety of the boats as if he were working to secure his own escape; and was throughout as calm and collected as in the happier moments of his life.
At half-past seven, the water in the hold obliged the people to come upon deck. The ship appeared to be settling bodily down. The boats were therefore at once hoisted out; and three of them were pushed clear, and rowed off, leaving Riou and a company of somo sixty-one souls to their fate on board the Guardian. Of the boats’ crews, that of the launch was the only one saved—being picked up by a French merchantman after ten days of horrible privations. ■
Though everything seemed over. Lieutenant Riou remained indefatigable in his efforts to preserve tho ship; and, by his noble example, shamed the others into hard work. To his great joy, he discovered that, though quite unmanageable, the Guardian had sunk for the present as far as she had a mind to. For several days she continued thus, rudderless and drifting; and his chief business was now to keep his crew in heart until they should sight land or be picked up by a passing ship. This was no easy task. Indeed, at one time, people carried their disobedience so far as to threaten his life, and had even constructed a raft of the booms, on which they were determined to take their chance rather than remain any longer on board the ship. Providentially, just as they were launching it, a favourable breeze sprung up, and their commander had just enough influence left to persuade them that in a short time, if this wind held, he could bring them to some friendly port.
Thus the Guardian continued to drive about at the mercy of the wind and sea until on the 22nd of February, 1790, to their inexpressible joy, they sighted the flat top of Table Moimtain in the morning light.
“ As morning broke, the light wind died away, When he who had the watch sung out and swore, If two not land that rose with the sun’s ray, He wished that land he never might see more ; And the rest rubbed their eyes, and saw a bay, Or thought they saw, and shaped their course for shore— For shore it was, and gradually grew Distinct, and high, and palpable to view.”
A British ship, that happened to be lying in Tabic Bay, sent out two whale boats to their assistance; and by these the Guardian was towed into anchorage. For some time Lieutenant Riou cherished hopes of working tho ship round to Saldanha Bay, where he might have a chance to repair, and put her into
Digitized by GOOQle
41G
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
condition to return to Europe; but the ship continued to make so much water that he was finally obliged to beach her, to prevent her sinking at her anchor.
The preservation of the Guardian was attributed chiefly to the casks in the hold pressing up against the lower deck, the hatchways of which were made excessively strong and caidked down. She was completely stove in under the counter, and had, besides, an amazing hole right through her bows, by which the iron and shingle ballast washed out, leaving her more buoyant. By the time she reached the Cape, she was thus little more than a floating raft. The number saved in the Guardian, besides Lieutenant Riou, were:—The Hon. Mr.
Pitt, afterwards Lord
CAFE TOWN.
Camelford, who was killed in a duel by a Captain Best; Mr. John Core and Mr. David Oillmore, midshipmen ; Mr. J. Williams, boatswain; Mr. M. Sampson, carpen t e r; Messrs. Schafer, Devine, and Hume, superintendents of convicts ; Elizabeth Schafer, the superintendent’s daughter; Mr. William Fairclough,
surgeon’s-mate; thirty common seamen and boys; and twenty-one convicts—in all, sixty-two. Immediately on his arrival at Cape Town, Lieutenant Riou despatched another letter to England, dated Table Bay, February 22nd, 1790.
“ Sir,—I hope this letter will reach you before any account arrives of the loss of His Majesty’s ship Guardian. If it should, I have to beg you will inform their lordships that, on the 23rd November, the ship struck on an island of ice ; and that on the 25th, all ho]>e of her safety having vanished, I consented that as many of the officers and people should take to the boats as thought proper. But it pleased Almighty God to assist my endeavours, with the remaining part of the crew, to arrive with His Majesty’s ship in this bay yesterday. A Dutch packet is now under sail for Eurojie, which prevents me from giving any further particulars, especially as at this instant I find it more necessary than ever to exert myself to prevent the ship from sinking at her anchors.
“ I am, sir, most respectfully,
“ Your ever obedient servant,
“ E Riou.”
Eight weeks after leaving the Cape, the captain of the Dutch packet hailed the skipper of a small fishing craft oft’ Dungeness, and gave him this letter,
Digitized by GOOQle
TIDINGS KEACH ENGLAND.
417
to be transmitted with all haste to the Admiralty. It arrived in London on the 28th of April, just five days after the Admiralty had received Riou’s first letter—the one he had handed to Mr. Clements when the launch had pushed off from the apparently sinking Guardian. For five days, therefore.
" STEM VPOX THE SHOAL ” (P J13X
Riou and his comrades had been mourned for as dead men. At a stroke, this sorrow was turned to rejoicing; and we are told that the letter “was immediately transmitted to the king, who, upon reading it, expressed uncommon satisfaction; and, at night, Lord Chatham set off post for Lord Camelford’s country seat, to carry him the joyful tidings of the safety of his son, who was on board the Guardian.”
of
Among the unnumbered perils of the sea, we have also to reckon the stroke lightning and the fall of meteors. Some little while ago, the master of a
27
Digitized by
Google
418 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
ship arrived at Dundee with a singular but very circumstantial report. He said that when his vessel was in latitude 51° S. and longitude 80° W., a large meteor of dazzling brilliancy fell into the sea within a few cables’ length of her. As it plunged into the water, it roared and hissed just like a mass of red-hot metal The second officer, Mr. John Veitch, took particular notice of the phenomenon and the bright light cast by it across the sky, and concludes his entry in the log-book by surmising that, " possibly, some ships that have gone a-missing may have been Struck and sent to the bottom by such meteors.” There is no reason to doubt that, had such a meteor struck the ship, it would have cut through her like a fiery sword.
On the peril of lightning, we may quote an old extract from the log of the Ville de Lyon, an American packet of 800 tons burden, which put into Plymouth Sound in June, 1837:—
“At 10 p.m., Barfleur Light bearing S.S.W., distant about fifteen miles, they experienced a heavy squall, from W.S.W., with rain. Whilst in the act of taking in sail, the ship was struck by lightning. The electric fluid descended by the main-topsail-sheets, passed through the bolt into the passageway leading to the cabin, thence ran along the bell-wires in the steward’s pantry, molting those connected with the larboard state-rooms, and passed through the side into the water, starting several of the tree nails, and ripping the copper. Two men engaged in hauling taut the main-topsail-sheet were instantly killed, and two others were hurt. Within a minute after, another shock, still more severe, struck the ship in the same manner as the first, and escaped in the same direction. A passenger, who was in the steward’s pantry examining the effects of the first stroke, was slightly injured in the head by the second. Notwithstanding the appalling scene, perfect order was observed. Captain Stoddard immediately sounded the pumps, and examined the vessel in every part. The appearance of the lightning was most remarkable. When the fluid struck the ship, the explosion resembled that of a bomb. The vessel, both above and below deck, appeared to be filled with fire. At 12 p.m. the wind moderated.”
But, on the whole, though it is always an anxious time at sea during an electric storm, the cases in which a vessel has been known to suffer from lightning are extremely rare. Dana’s theory was that a ship, by offering many points to a storm, scatters the electric fluid and, in a sense, dissipates its strength; but this theory will hardly hold water. It is true that, at such times, sparks and tongues of fire may be seen flickering down and along the iron-work of a ship—such as the stays and boom-irons. But these appearances are rather what seamen call “ composants ” (probably from the Spanish, euerpo santo) than that severer form of electricity known to us as lightning.
When a ship takes fire at sea, it is commonly through some act of carelessness on the part of its crew—as with the Queen Charlotte, whose fate we have already told. But many ships are burnt at sea from the spontaneous
Digitized by Goode
THE R. B. FULLER ON FIRE.
419
combustion of their cargoes. Ships laden with coal are peculiarly liable to thia Gas collects among the coal in large quantities; and if the vessel be bound on a long voyage, her hatches should be taken off occasionally to give this gas an opportunity of escaping. If this precaution be not taken, and the gas be suffered to accumulate, it is obvious that the slightest spark may bring about a terrible disaster. In one year, of late, no less than thirty-two vessels laden with coal, outward bound from British ports, disappeared, of which seven were known to be burnt, and, probably, more were. In his "Round the Galley Fire,” Mr, Clark Russell tells us of an American ship, the R. B. Fuller, outward bound from Cardiff to Valparaiso, with a cargo of coals. About 10 o’clock one night, when she was a little more than three weeks out on her voyage, her captain, Mr, Thomas Peabody, was awakened in his cabin by a feeling of suffocation, and found the place full of smoke, charged with the most nauseating odours. He rushed on deck and called for the officer of the watch. The chief mate came running out of the darkness forward, and, before Captain Peabody could address him, cried out that the ship was on fire. At the cry, the crew came tumbling up from the forecastle, and at once fell to work to fight the enemy. Every ventilator was closed and the cabin shut up, in the hope of stifling the fire, and the men then gathered in the waist, to watch and to wait Not a trace of flame had yet been seen.
In a few moments, however—tightly as everything was closed—the ship began to leak out smoke from every scam. It was like a mist rising from the compact earth. They now fell to work to bore holes in the deck; manned the pumps; fetched hose and buckets; and tried to drown the fire by pouring water into the cargo. Clouds of steam came up through the holes; and, as they faded away, were regularly followed by coils of black smoke and whiffs of poisonous gas that forced the men to work with averted faces. Still, not a trace of flame was visible; but the captain gave orders to lower the boats.
As soon as the boats were alongside, the captain, wishing to fetch certain articles from the cabin, went down with the mate and four seamen. But they had not been there a minute before they were forced to run out, some of them vomiting blood, and lie down upon deck to recover in the fresh air. After a while they managed to victual the boats, and, having braced the ship’s mainyards aback, rowed off to the distance of about half a mile, and there lay
on their oars and waited to see what tho end would be.
The night was calm and the ship steady. The smoke in a straight column, and hung heavily above her; but they watched, no spark or flame was visible.
Considering this, they began to hope that the fire, after
rose up from her hour by hour, as
all, was not so bad
as they had feared; and soon after daybreak, though the smoke still crawled thickly from her, they headed for the vessel again. The captain’s boat was the first to get alongside, and he jumped on board with a few men. The heat of the deck struck through his boots and he put a hand to the planks. It Digitized by Google
420
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
was like touching hot iron. The very ropes were too hot to handle. A ery of one of the seamen, who had come over the side in bare feet, raised a kind of panic, and they all hurried back into the boats. Even there, putting their hands to the vessel’s side as low as the water-line was like touching a boiler full of steam. They rowed back to their old position; and now the gathering wind seemed to penetrate the vessel and send up thicker clouds, mingled now
and for the rest of
“a lakob msteoh .... fell isTo the sea” (p us'. • the day the sparks continued to pour up from the hole thus made, tinging the sails forward with a dusky red.
The second night fell; and at length, just an hour after darkness, a jet of red flame shot out of the deck abaft the main-mast. By its light the men could see one another’s faces. It sank, and for a minute or two seemed to have died away. Then it leapt up again, higher this time, wreathing itself around the main-mast. Almost at once a second flame poured up from the fore-hatch: and in an incredibly short time the whole outline of the vessel was picked out with fire. “ Every detail of the standing masts and yards and sails, the crosstrecs, outriggers, and tops all the furniture of the ship’s decks,
Digitized by
Google
THE EARL OF ELDOV.	421
the boat-davits, the catheads, the martingale, the spritsail-yard—were expressed in flame. It was like the picture of a ship drawn in fire upon a black curtain.”
The men sat silent in the boats and watched. For a while this picture shone upon the night. Then, suddenly, the burning hold opened; a tremendous sheet of flame went up into the sky; and through the roar of it was heard the crash of the falling masts and yards : and with that the whole vision vanished “as you might blow out a candle.” As the boom of an explosion came sullenly up against the wind, the men were left in darkness, broken only by the glimmer of stars upon the black sea. Their ship gone, they tossed about for two days and nights, when they sighted a sail to the westward and rowed in pursuit. She was the barque Pa racca, of London; and, as soon as the boats were sighted by her, she lay-to and picked the poor fellows up.
“ IT WAB LTKB A MIST BISISI) ” <P- U9).
Ships laden with wool or cotton are also liable to take fire from the heating of their cargo, in the same way that ricks often take fire ashore. It was this that led to the famous catastrophe that befel the Pari of Eldon.
The Earl of Eldon was a fine, strongly-built ship of 600 tons, and seemed
Digitized by GOOQle
422
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
in every way fitted to contend with ail the usual dangers of the sea. On this her last voyage, she was laden with cotton bales. She also carried a few passengers. Between decks the space was filled up with cotton bales, packed so tightly as to render it a matter of more difficulty to take them out than it had been to put them in. Unfortunately, before shipping, the cotton had become wet through exposure to a heavy rainfall After going through a hasty process of drying in the warehouses, it had been pressed into bales by means of powerful screws; and it is probable that after shipment fire-damp may have been generated in the same manner as in hay that has been stacked damp. The number of people on board was forty-five—including three ladies and an infant, and the commander, Captain Theaker, and his crew.
The ship sailed from Bombay on the 24th of August, 1834; and her subsequent adventures have been described by an officer of the Madras Artillery, who was one of the passengers. The following is his narrative:—
“On the 26th of September, the trade wind seemed to have fairly caught hold of our sails, and we anticipated a speedy arrival at the Cape. On the morning of the 27 th, I rose early—about half-past five—and went on deck. I found one of my fellow-passengers there. We perceived a steam arising, apparently, from the fore hatchway. I remarked to Hunt that I thought it might be caused by fire-damp, and, if not immediately checked, might become fire. The captain came on deck, and I asked him what it was. He answered, steam; and that it was common enough in cot ton-loaded ships when the hatchways were opened. I said nothing; but, the smoke becoming more dense and assuming a different colour, I thought all was not right, and also that the captain had some idea of this kind, as the carpenter was cutting holes in the deck just above the place whence the smoke appeared to come.
“ I went down to dress, and about half-past six Captain Theaker knocked at my door, and told me that part of the cotton was on fire, and that he wished to see all the gentlemen passengers on deck. We assembled, and he stated the ease to be this: That some part ot the cargo had been spontaneously ignited, and that he wished to remove part of the bales, till he could come to the ignited ones, and throw these overboard. We, of course, left everything to his judgment The hands were ordered to breakfast as quickly as possible, and set to work to discover the source of the fire. This having been done, he * said there did not seem to be immediate danger, and that he hoped to avert it altogether. But at eight o’clock the smoke became much thicker, and rolled ■ through the after-hatchway—the draught being admitted forward, to allow the men to work. Several bales were removed; but the heat from below became intolerable, the smoke rolled out in suffocating volumes, and, before nine, part of tho deck had caught fire; in short, the men were obliged to stop work The hatches were battened down, to keep the fire from bursting out; the boats were hoisted out and stocked; and about half-past one, the three ladies, two sick passengers, an infant, and a female servant, were put into the long-boat, with
Digitized by LnOOQle
THEY TAKE TO THE BOATS. 423
two hundred and sixteen gallons of water, twenty of brandy, preserved meats and biscuits for a month.
“It was now two o’clock; the hatches were opened, and all hands set to try to extinguish the fire. The main-hatch being lifted, and a tarpaulin removed, there was a sail underneath, which was so hot that the men could scarcely lift it; when they did, the heat and smoke came up worse than ever. The fire being found to be underneath that part of the deck, orders were given to hoist out the bales till the inflamed ones could be reached; but when the men got hold of the lashing to introduce a crane-hook, the cotton was found to be burned beneath, and the charred stuff came away in their hands.
“ Our case was now bad indeed. We tried to remove the cotton by handfuls; but the smoke was so overpowering, that no man could stand over the hatchway, and water, in the quantities that we dared to use, only seemed to increase the fire; for had the captain ventured to pump water into the ship to extinguish the fire, the bales would have swelled so much as to have burst open the deck, and increased in weight sufficient to sink the ship; either way, destruction would have been the issue. Seeing the case to be hopeless, the captain assembled us on the poop, and asked if we knew any expedient for extinguishing the fire and saving the ship, as in that case ‘ we will stick by her while a hope remains.' All agreed that nothing could be done; the crew were all sober, and had done their best in the fearful emergency.
"The heat increased so much that it became dangerous to leave the poop. The captain then requested us to get into the boats; told off, and embarked his men; and at three, himself left the ship, just as the flames burst through the quarter-deck. We put off, the two boats towing the long-boat; the ship’s way having been previously stopped by backing her yards. When we were about a mile from the ship, she was in one blaze, and her masts began to fall in. The sight was grand, though awful. Between eight and nine, she had burned to the water’s edge; then there suddenly came a bright flash, followed by a dull, heavy explosion—the powder had caught; for a few seconds her splinters and flaming fragments were glittering in the air, then all was gloom!
*' Sad was the prospect now before us! In the long-boat were the captain and twenty-five of the crew and passengers, with an infant four months old; the size of the boat being twenty-three feet long by seven and a half broad. The other two boats each held ten individuals, including the officer in charge. One of these had some bags of biscuits aboard; but the chief provision was in the long-boat We were a thousand miles from Rodrigue, and four hundred and fifty from Diego Garcias, the largest of the Chagos Islands; but to get there we must brave the sea as much as in the stormy latitudes we had left, exposed alternately -to squalls and calms. We therefore determined on trying for Rodrigue.
"About eleven at night we rigged the boats, and got under sail In the long-boat we carried a lantern lashed to our mast, to prevent the others from
Digitized by Goode
-THE PICTURE OF A SHIP DRAWN IN FIRE" (p, MU
Digitized by^OOQlC
IN THE BOATS.
425
losing us during the darkness; and at daybreak we sent them sailing in all directions to look for ships. While the wind was light they could out-sail us; but when it blew strongly, and the sea was high, the difference of speed was rather in our favour, as the weight and size of the long-boat enabled her to lay hold of the water better. On the third day the change of the moon approached.
and the weather began to look threatening; but as we were in the trade, we did not fear foul or con trary winds. During the night it blew freshly, with rain; we were without shelter, and the sea, dashing its spray over us, drenched us and spoilt a great part of our biscuit, though we did not discover this till we were nearly out of our dangers. The discomfort and misery of our situation were very great. There was a large waterpuncheon in the boat, on the top of which I slept nearly all the time we were in the boats. The ladies were in the stern of the long-boat ; and Hunt, myself, the doctor, and a Bombay lieutenant, in the body of the craft with the men.
“ In the course of the next day the weather grew worse, and one of the
“ THE THREE LADIES .	. . WERE PVT INTO
THE LONO-ROAT” (?• *22',
small boats—in which was Mr. Simpson, the second mate, with nine others— was split by the sea. She came alongside, and therein we put the carpenter, who made what repairs he could, but with little hope of their answering. Having lashed a bamboo four feet up the mast, and fixed it on the intersection of two stanchions at the same height above the stern, we then fastened a piece of canvas along our weather-gunwale. The cloth was firmly lashed along this, so as to form a kind of half-pent roof. But for this imperfect defence, we must have been swamped ; and we still shipped seas to such an extent that four men
Digitized by GOOQle
426
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
were constantly employed in baling. In the evening it blew hard, with a tremendous sea; and not thinking the damaged boat safe, we took in her crew and abandoned her. Thirty-six persons were now stowed closely in the long-boat, and we were obliged to throw over all superfluities. We had not more than eight inches of clear gunwale out of the water.
“That miserable night I shall never forget. Wet, crushed, and miserable, the night passed away, and morning broke. Though the weather was still very bad, I again felt that hope had not entirely deserted me. A tremendous sea came rolling down, and I drew in my breath with horror: it broke right over our stern, drenched the poor women to their throats, and carried off the steersman’s hat. But the captain cried out in a tone of encouragement, ‘ That’s nothing! it’s all right; bale away, my boys ! ’ He told us afterwards, however, that lie did not expect we would live out the night Although harassed in mind and body, he never let us despair. He stood on a bench the whole night, and slept none for nearly forty-eight hours.
“Morning again broke; and as after the change of the moon the weather moderated a little, we enjoyed comparative comfort. We had three small meals of biscuit and jam daily, with three half-pints of water and a little brandy. The sailors were allowed a gill of spirits each day. We had plenty of cigars; and whenever we could strike a light, had a smoke, which we found to be a great luxury. The ladies were most wretched, however, for they could not move, and any little alteration in their dress could only be effected by drawing a curtain in front of them; yet they did not utter one repining word.
“ On the thirteenth evening after the burning of the ship we began to look out for Rodrigue; the captain telling us meanwhile not to be too sanguine, as his chronometer was not to be trusted after its late rough treatment. Tho night fell, and I went forward to sleep; but about twelve o'clock I was awakened by the cry that land was right ahead. Looking in that direction, I saw land looming through the mist. The boat was brought-to for an hour; we then made sail for the coast, and about half-past two the outlines thereof became more definite and clear. We now lay-to until daylight. I attempted to compose myself to sleep; but my feelings were too strong, and I betook myself to smoking.
“ With the first light of dawn Rodrigue appeared six miles ahead, and by eight a.m. we had all been safely landed. A fisherman, who came to show us the way through the reefs, received us into his house, and proceeded to set before us some food, meanwhile sending to the gentlemen of the island information as to our arrival. Two of them came down immediately, and, having heard the story of our perils, said that our preservation was almost miraculous. We set off from the fisherman’s dwelling in two parties; the married men going to the house of one of the gentlemen, and the single to that of the other. The crew were taken inland to a suitable spot, and there encamped. Our bundles were carried by negroes to the houses of our hosts.
Digitized byVrOOQlC
THEY REACH RODRIGUE.
427
where everything needful was at once supplied to us — clean linen and a plentiful dinner. We then retired to bed, and enjoyed a luxury to which we had been strangers during a fortnight—a sound sleep.
“ I hope the sense of our miraculous preservation dwells deeply on all our minds. My feelings on landing were so intense that I could not restrain my tears. No human skill in such peril could have availed us; it was the
Hand of Almighty Goodness alone that withheld us from destruction: and when I consider it and look back upon the facts as they stand recorded, and with the full knowledge that we were thirteen days and nights exposed to the violence of winds and waves and weather, in an open, leaky boat, often for days and nights completely drenched, and never completely dry’, and that with this we should all (with the exception of those who were before sick) have landed safe, and rather improved in health than otherwise—these things show the hand of a Providence that watches over us, though we too often forget it; and that man who could coldly say that our escape was surprising, without attributing it wholly and solely to the true Cause, I should consider little better than a heathen.”
Digitized by LnOOQle
428
THE STOHY OF THE SEA.
A more fortunate case was that of the iron ship Colombo—laden with cotton, jute, and hemp—which took fire in the same way soon after leaving Calcutta. Her cargo continued to smoulder and burn all the time that she crossed the Indian Ocean, rounded the Cape of Good Hope, sailed up across the equator into the North Atlantic, passed up Channel, and until she actually
11 OUR BUNDLES W JUiE CARRIED BY NEGROES*’ (p. |27X
cast anchor in the Thames. At times, her sides were so hot that it was impossible to keep a hand on them. Once or twice the hatches were opened for a few minutes, and the crew got up some of the burning cargo and flung it overboard; but were afraid to keep the hatches open for any length of time, lest the air should puff the smouldering mass into a blaze. And so they came home all the way from the East Indies with the ship burning under their feet
We will conclude our stories of fire at sea with that of the Fame, lost on the night of February 2nd, 1824, off Bencoolen, in the island of Sumatra. Sir Thomas Stamford Raffles, Governor of Bencoolen, with Lady Raffles, was on board, homeward bound for England; and he thus described the disaster in a
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE LOSS OF THE TAMS.
429
letter to a triend:—“We embarked on the 2nd instant, in the Fame, and sailed at daylight for England, with a fair wind and every prospect of a quick and comfortable passage. The ship was everything we could wish, and, having
closed my charge days of my life. We were, perhaps, too happy; for in the evening came a sad reverse. Sophia had just gone to bed, and I had thrown ofl* half my clothes, when a cry of Fire! Fire! roused us from our calm content, and in five min* utes the whole ship was in flames. I ran to examine whence the flames principally issued, and found that the tire had its origin immediately under our cabin. Down with the boats! where is Sophia ? Here ! The children ?
here much to my satisfaction, it was one of the happiest
“roared out host lustily” (p 430).
Here ! A rope to
the side; lower Lady Raffles—give her to me, says one—I’ll take her, says the captain. Throw the gunpowder overboard; it cannot be got at; it is in the magazine, close to the fire! Stand clear of the powder. Scuttle the water-casks. Water! Water! Where's Sir Stamford? Come into the boat. Nelson, Nelson! come into the boat. Push off; push off; stand clear of the after-part of the ship.
“All this passed much quicker than I can write it; we pushed off, and as we did so, the flames were issuing from our cabins, and the whole of the after-part of the ship was in flames. The masts and sails now taking fire, we moved to a distance sufficient to avoid the immediate explosion; but the flames were now coming out of the main-hatchway, and seeing the rest of the crew,
Digitized by
Google
430
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
with the captain, still on board, etc., we pulled back to her under the bows, so as to be most distant from the powder. As we approached, we perceived that the people from on board were getting into another boat on the opposite side; she pushed off, we hailed her. 'Have you ail on board?’ ‘Yes, all save one.’ ‘Who is he?’ ‘Johnson, sick in his cot.’ ‘Can we save him?’ 'No, impossible.’ The flames were then issuing from the hatchway. At this moment the poor fellow, scorched, I imagined, by the flames, roared out most lustily, having run up on the deck. ‘ I will go for him,’ says the captain. The two boats then came together, and we took out some of the persons from the captain’s boat, which was overladen. He then pulled under the bowsprit of the ship, and picked the poor fellow up, ‘Are you all safe?* ‘Yes, we’ve got the man ; all lives safe, thank God; pull off from the ship; keep your eye on a star, Sir Stamford; there's one barely visible.’
" We then hauled close to each other, and found the captain fortunately had a compass, but we had no light but from the ship. Our distance from Bencoolen we estimated to be from twenty to thirty miles in a S.W. direction; there being no landing-place to the southward of Bencoolen, our only chance was to regain that port. The captain then undertook to lead, and we to follow, in a N.N.E. course, as well as we could, no chance, no possibility, being left that we could again approach the ship, for she was now one splendid flame fore and aft and aloft, her masts and sails in a blaze, and rocking to and fro, threatening to fall in instantly. ‘ There goes her mizzenmast ; pull away, my boys; there goes the gunpowder, thank God 1 ’
“ You may judge of our situation without further particulars: the alarm was given at about twenty minutes past eight, and in less than ten minutes she was in flames; there was not a soul on board at half-past eight, and in less than ten minutes afterwards she was one grand mass of fire.
“ My only apprehension was, the want of boats to hold the people, as there was not time to have got out the long-boat, or make a raft; all we had to rely upon were two small open boats, which fortunately were lowered without accident; and in these two small open boats, without a drop of water or grain of food, or a rag of covering, except what we happened at the moment to have on our backs, we embarked on the wide ocean, thankful to God for His mercies. Poor Sophia, having been taken out of her bed, had nothing on but a wrapper, neither shoes nor stockings; the children were just as taken out of a bed, whence one had been snatched after the flames had attacked it. In short, there was no time for anyone to think of more than two things—‘ Can the ship be saved ?' ‘ No.’ * Let us save ourselves, then.’ All else was swallowed up in one great ruin.
“ To make the best of our misfortune, we availed ourselves of the light from the ship to steer a tolerably good course towards the shore. She continued to burn till about midnight, when the saltpetre, of which she had 250 tons on board, took fire, and sent up one of the most splendid and brilliant flames
Digitized by Goode
PRESERVATION OF THE CREW.
431
that was ever seen, illumining the horizon in every direction to the extent of not less than fifty miles, and casting that kind of blue light over us which is, of all others, most luridly horrible. She burnt, and continued to flame in this style for about an hour or two, when we lost sight of the object in a cloud of smoke.
“ Neither Nelson, nor Mr. Bell, our medical friend, who accompanied us, had saved their coats; the skirt of mine, with a pocket-handkerchief, served to keep Sophia’s feet warm; and we made breeches for the children with our neckcloths. Rain now came on, but fortunately it was not of long continuance, and we got dry again; the night became serene and starlit. We were now certain of our course, and the men behaved manfully; they rowed incessantly, and with good heart and spirit, and never did poor mortals look out more for daylight and for land than we did. Not that our sufferings or ground of complaint were anything to what has often befallen others; but from Sophia’s delicate health, as well as my own, and the stormy nature of the coast, I felt perfectly convinced we were unable to undergo starvation or exposure to currents. I feared we might fall to the southward of the port.
“ At daylight we recognised the coast and Rat Island, which gave us great spirits, and though we found ourselves much to the southward of the port, we considered ourselves almost at home. Sophia had gone through the night better than could have been expected, and we continued to pull on with all our strength. About eight or nine o’clock we saw a ship standing to us from the roads. They had seen the flame on shore, and sent out vessels in all directions to our relief; and here certainly came a minister of Providence, in the character of a minister of the Gospel; for the first person I recognised was one of our missionaries. They gave us a bucket of water, and we took the captain on board as a pilot. The wind, however, was adverse, and we could not reach the shore, and took to the ship, where we got some refreshment and shelter from the sun. By this time Sophia was quite exhausted, fainting continually. About two o’clock we landed safe and sound, and no words of mine can do justice to the expression of feeling, sympathy, and kindness with which we were hailed by everyone. If any proof had been wanting that my administration had been satisfactory, here we had it unequivocally from all; there was not a dry eye, and, as we drove back to our former home, loud was the cry of ‘ God be praised! ’
" But enough: and I will only add that we are now greatly recovered, in good spirits, and busy at work getting ready-made clothes for present use. We went to bed at three o’clock in the afternoon, and I did not awake till six this morning. Sophia had nearly as sound a sleep, and with the exception of a bruise or two, and a little pain in the bones from fatigue, we have nothing to complain o£”
Digitized by
Google
CHAPTER XVIIL
THE PLEASURES OF THE SEA: YACHTING.
The Beauty of the Sport — Beginnings of English Yachting—Charles II. Beats the Duke of York on the Thames Course—Mr. Pepys Aboard the Sezan—The Royal Cork Water-dub and its Rules—The Cumberland Fleet and its Early Races—The R. Y. 8. and Other Clubs—American Clubs—The First Great Ocean Race—The Henrietta Wins—The Ocean Race of 1887—Coronel v. Dauntlcee—Rough Work with the Coronel—A Near Share—The Winning-post—Different Classes of Yachtsmen—Single-handed Sailing—Mr. McMullen's Cruise in the Orion— Misbehaviour of his Men —Ho Resolves to Bring the Boat Homo Single-handed; and Does so —Hard Work and Experiences by the Way—Evolution of the Modem Yacht—The Rating-Rule and the Type it Fosters.
IT is time that we should turn from the perils of seafaring to its pleasures.
A nation which looks upon seafaring merely as an unpleasant condition of military supremacy or mercantile success would not, we may be sure, retain that supremacy or that success for very long. That the sea may be loved by Englishmen for her own sake is happily clear enough. Else, why do our boys still run away to sea ? and why do our millionaires (who are not, for the most part, particularly simple folk) expose themselves to the horrors of sea-sickness during the months of July and August ? Fashion may partly supply the answer to the second question. But it is certainly a happy chance—if it be no more than a chance—that, just at the time when steam is destroying the beauty of our ships of war and merchant vessels, the mystery and craft of sailing should pass into the care of men to whom the sea is its own reward. In their hands it seems to be taking a new life altogether, and the development of speed in racing yachts during the last few years is hardly less remarkable than the record-breaking performances of the great Atlantic liners. “ There is a story," says Mr. Clark Russell, “ told of a butterfly alighting on the breast of a dying girl and taking wing at the very moment she expired, and soaring into the blue sky with the sunshine sparkling on its bright wings. I thought of this tale the other day when I spied the hulk of what appeared to have been a sailing frigate or an old East India merchantman towing up Channel. There was a strong, clear wind, and the water flashed like a prism, and I was gazing with interest at the poor old dismasted hulk when a fine schooner yacht, beating to the eastward, swirled up under her stern. A noble sight was that pleasure vessel. Her lee-rail was almost flush with the foam which swept like a storm of snow under the gleaming milk-white curve of her lower cloths; to windward her sheathing was hove high, and the yellow metal glittered like new
Digitized by LnOOQle
"AN OLD EAST INDIA MERCHANTMAN TOWING UP CHANNEL” (p. 432k
28
Digitized by GOOQle
434 THE STORY OF THE SEA. .
gold as it glanced through the network of spray and the shining emerald-green fibres of water which leapt about her glossy sides. She might have been the very spirit of the old dismantled sailing-ship, leaping into bright and beautiful being as the most exquisite and the completest expression of marine grace.”
We can hardly give an exact date for the beginning of English yachting. In 1604 we hear of a yacht built for the ill-starred Prince Henry of Wales by Mr. Phineas Pett, a great naval designer of the time. But it is not till after the Restoration that we'hear of yacht-racing. Early in his reign, King Charles commissioned Mr. Pett to build him a pleasure-boat on a Dutch model, but with improvements. In this he sailed, and won the first yacht race on the Thames, from Greenwich to Gravesend and back again—the present course of the Royal Thames Yacht Club. Samuel Pepys give some account of this in his famous Diary:—
January 13, 1660-1661.—Lord’s Day. To the Globe to dinner, then to Commissioner Pett, to his lodgings there, which he hath for the present while he is building the King’s yacht, which will be a very pretty thing, and much beyond the Dutchman’s. *' -
January 15.—The King hath been this afternoon to Deptford to see the yacht that Commissioner Pett is building, which will be very pretty, as also that his brother Christopher Pett (son of Phineas Pett) at Woolwich is making.
November 8.—On board the yacht, which, indeed, is one of the finest things that ever I saw for neatness and room in so small a vessel.
May 21, 1661.—To Deptford, and took barge, and were overtaken by the King in his barge, he having been down the river in his yacht this day for pleasure to try it; and I hear Commissioner Pett’s do prove better than the Dutchman, and that his brother did build at Woolwich.
October 1, 1661.—Between Charles II. and his brother the Duke of York for 100 guineas, sailing match from Greenwich to Gravesend and back. The King won.
Later on Mr. Pepys tried the experiment of sleeping on board the little Dutch yacht Bezan;—
September 17, 1665.—Lord’s Day. To church to Gravesend in the Bezan yacht, and then to anchor for all night; and with much pleasure at last to sleep, having very good lodging upon cushions in the cabbin.
He seems, at any rate, to have been so far satisfied with the experiment as to repeat it a fortnight later:—
October 1, 1665.—Lord’s Day. Embarked on board the Bezan . . . After supjrer on board the Bezan, then to cards for awhile, and so to sleep ; but, Lord ! the mirth it caused me to be waked in the night by the snoring round me.
The first of yacht chibs—the Water-Chib of the Harbour of Cork—-was established in 1720, and in time developed into that still flourishing association, —the Royal Cork Yacht Club. Some of the early rules are entertaining:—
1.	Ordered that the Watcr-Club be held once every spring-tide, from the first spring-tide in April to the last in September inexclusive.
2.	That no Admiral do bring more than two dishes of meat for the entertainment of the Club.
3.	Resolve that no Admiral presume to bring more than two dozen of wine to his treat, for it has always been deemed a breach of the ancient rules and constitutions of the Club, except when my Lords the Judges are invited. -
Digitized by GOOQle
PRIMITIVE YACHTING.	435
5.	Ordered that the Secretary do prepare an Union flag, with the Royal Irish harp and -crown on a green field in the centre.	,
9.	Ordered that no long tail wigs, large sleeves, or ruffles be worn by any member of the Club.	'
14.	Resolve that such members of the Club or others as shall talk of sailing after dinner’ be fined a bumper.
The doings of the Cork Water-Club are thus noticed in “A Tour through Ireland,” a little book printed in London " for J. Roberts in Warwick Lane,” 1748:—
“ I shall now acquaint your Lordships with a ceremony they have at Cork. It is somewhat like that of the Doge of Venice wedding the sea. A set of worthy gentlemen, who have formed themselves into a body which they call the Water-Club, proceed a few leagues out to sea once a year in a number of little vessels, which, for painting and gilding, exceed the King’s yachts at Greenwich and Deptford. Their Admiral, who is elected annually and hoists his flag on board his little vessel, leads the van and receives the honours of the ‘ flag. The rest of the fleet fall in their proper stations, and keep their line in the same manner as the King's ships. This fleet is attended with a prodigious number of boats, which, with their colours flying, drums beating, and trumpets sounding, forms one of the most agreeable and splendid sights your Lordships can conceive.”
If the Royal Cork Yacht Club be the oldest of yacht clubs in the United Kingdom, the Royal Thames Yacht Club may claim the longest ancestry in Great Britain. This club grew out of the famous “ Cumberland Fleet,” which was founded as far back as the year 1777, when his Royal Highness Henry Frederick, Duke of Cumberland and an Admiral of the British Navy, offered a silver cup, to be sailed for from Westminster Bridge to Putney Bridge and back, by pleasure sailing boats of from two to five tons’ burden. The race came ofl on July 13th, and was a great success—the winner being the Aurora, owned by a Mr. Parkes, “ late of Ludgate Hill.”
These early races of the Cumberland Fleet were very solemn affairs. “The Duke embarked on board his state barge from one of the stairs, and the Royal Standard was immediately hoisted at the bow. Another barge was in company with a band of music, and they then proceeded to the place of starting. The racing boats were anchored in line, with their sails furled ; their places having beforehand been determined by lot. Each vessel, when racing, carried at her gaff a white flag with a red St. George’s Cross upon it, and with one, two, three, or more blue balls, according to her position at starting. The captains were stationed in wherries, and, on the arrival of the Duke’s barge, were by signal ordered on board their respective vessels. Then, on the firing of a gun, the race was started. Time allowance was an unknown quantity in those primitive days, and the boat which succeeded in passing the winning-post first claimed the cup. The victorious captain was then taken on board the commodore’s barge, and with great ceremony introduced to his Royal Highness. In the
■ ized byUvOOQlC
436
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
meantime, the Duke’s butler had filled the cup with claret and handed it to his Royal Highness, who thereupon drank the health of the winner, and then presented him with the cup. The captain then drank to the Duke and Duchess, with three cheers; the whole ceremony having been performed amidst the strains of marshal music, salvoes of artillery, and the huzzas of the crowd upon the river and its banks. The fleet then proceeded up the stream to Smith's tea-gardens (which lay where the gas-works now are, on the Surrey side of Vauxhall Bridge), and dined together. The Duke himself was very often present at these festive gatherings; and, later on in the evening, they all visited Vauxhall Gardens and made a night of it.” •
The newspapers of the day had some very striking titles for these meetings. One paper, for instance, called them “ Flu viatic and Fresh Water Frolics;” another, “ Thamesian Pleasantry;” a third, “Water-racing Galloways;” while the Morning Post of July 26th, 1782, describes the race of that year as “ A Fluviatic Cavalcade." They also had queer methods of conducting their
“ THE VICTORIOUS CAPTAIN ” (p 435).
The Badminton “ Yachting." London* Longman*, Green & Co. 1894.
Vol. II., p. 155.
Digitized by
Google
EAKLY YACHT CLUBS.
437
races in those days. In 1786 there was a combination against a boat called the Prince of Wales—the other boats purposely getting in her way—but she got
“WHIPPED OUT A CUTLASS’’ (p. 137),
clear by a liberal use of hand-spikes, and, beating her assailants off, won the race. In 1795, again, the Mercury, which was the leading boat, somehow managed to get foul of the Vixen, whereupon the captain of the Vixen whipped out a cutlass and slashed away at the Mercury's rigging until she was pretty well dismantled. During this little passage of arms (there was no protest, by the way), a third boat, the Mermaid, slipped ahead and won the cnp. ■
In the year 1823 the Cumberland Fleet was merged in the Royal Thames Yacht Club, which remains one of the leading clubs to this day. Of its recent contests, the most famous, perhaps, was that of 1887, when, to mark the occasion of her Majesty’s Jubilee, a special prize of one thousand guineas was offered for an ocean match round Great Britain and Ireland—the winning-post being at Dover. It was won by Sir Richard Sutton’s cutter, the Genesta, whose still more famous races with the Mayflower for the .America's Cup we shall describe in the next chapter. But the most famous of British yachting associations is undoubtedly the Royal Yacht Squadron (established in 1812), which has its headquarters at Cowes Castle in the Isle of Wight, on the site of an old fort built in the time of Henry VIII. for the protection of the
Digitized by
Google
438
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
Medina River. The building is backed by a line of elms, and its platform .commands a magnificent prospect of the . Solent and Spithead. Since the year 1842 members of the R.Y.S. (as the squadron is usually called) alone possess the coveted distinction of carrying the white ensign of her Majesty’s fleet. Other Royal clubs are allowed to fly the blue ensign; and each has its distinguishing burgee or triangular flag. The burgee of the Royal Yacht Squadron, for instance, is white, with a red St. George’s Cross and a crown in the centre; that of the Royal Cork is red, with a gold harp and crown; of the Royal Thames, blue, with a white cross and red crown in the centre ; of the Royal Western of England (founded at Plymouth in 1827), blue, with a gold crown; of the Royal London (1838), blue, with the City arms and a crown above them ; of the Royal Victoria (founded at Ryde in 1845, and now commonly known as the “ Red Squadron"), red, with a gold crown and anchor between the letters “ V. R.” American yacht clubs carry for their ensign the Stars and Stripes, with the stars arranged, not as usual, but in a circle. The burgee of the famous New York Yacht Club is blue, with a red cross and one white star in the centre.
To the last-named famous club—of which we shall have something to say in the next chapter—belongs the honour of having conceived and carried out the first, and, in many respects, the most remarkable, ocean race ever sailed between yachts. The undertaking, like many another great one, was an after-dinner inspiration. Messrs. George and Franklin Osgood, of the New York Yacht Club, took it into their heads to bet with Mr. Pierre Lorillard, Jun., another member of the club, that their schooner Fleetwing could beat his schooner Vesta on a race from Sandy Hook to the Needles, on the coast of England—“ yachts to start from Sandy Hook on the second Tuesday in December, 1866, to sail according to the rules of the New York Yacht Club, waiving allowance of time. The sails to be carried are mainsail, foresail, jib, flying jib, jib topsail, fore- and main-gaff topsail, storm staysail, and trysail”
No sooner did the particulars of this wager become known, than Mr. James Gordon Bennett, also a member of the club, and afterwards its Vice-Commodore, announced his desire to enter his schooner Henrietta for the same contest. After some consideration, Messrs. Osgood and Lorillard consented, and an article was added to the agreement as follows:—
The yacht Henrietta enters the above race by paying 830,000 subscription by members of the New York Yacht Club. Any minor points not embraced in the above, that cannot be settled by Messrs. Osgood, Lorillard, and Bennett, shall be decided as follows: Each shall choose an umpire ; the umpires chosen, in case of a disagreement, to choose two others. Twenty per cent, of the money to be deposited with Mr. Leonard W. Jerome on the 3rd of November, the balance to be deposited on the first Tuesday in December. Play or pay.
Signed by J. G. Bennett, Jun. Franklin Osgood. George A. Osgood.
December 5, 1866.	Pierre Lorillard, Jun.
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE FIRST OCEAN RACE, 1866.
439
It was further agreed that neither yacht should take a Channel pilot from New York; that each might cany a square sail in addition to the sails already agreed upon; and that each might shift anything but ballast. The yachts were to start at one in the afternoon of Thursday, December 11th; and the race was to end when the Needles Lighthouse, at the western extremity of the Isle of Wight, appeared abeam, with the yacht on the true Channel Course.
Public opinion in America was greatly excited over the proposed race. It was considered hazardous enough for vessels of the size of these three schooners to cross the Atlantic at any time, even with reduced spars and canvas; but that they should propose to start with racing rig, and cross at racing speed in the dead of winter, was enough to set the public mouth agape. The size of the stake, too—$90,000 in all—appealed to the Yankee imagination, especially as one of these very wealthy gentlemen, Mr. Bennett, proposed to risk his person on the voyage.
The three yachts made a magnificent start, and reached England very close together. It was Mr. Bennett’s yacht, the Henrietta, that won, having sailed , 3,106 luiles in thirteen days, twenty-one hours, and fifty-five minutes. The Fleetwing came second- having sailed 3,135 miles in fourteen days, six hours, ten minutes. The Vesta was just forty minutes behind her, having sailed 3,144 miles in fourteen days, six hours, fifty minutes. She was really the fastest boat of the three, and was actually leading the day before they made land ; when a blunder of her navigator, in not allowing sufficiently for the strength of the Runnel Current, caused her to drop in to. lee ward of the Sc illy Isles with a southerly wind blowing. And when she had managed to beat out into the open Channel, she might still have obtained second place, had not her Channel pilot blundered still less excusably, and taken her past her port. ‘
The only accident in the race was that which befel the Fleet wing on December 19th, while running before a gale under a double-reefed foresail and* fore-staysail At nine o’clock in the evening she shipped a tremendous sea, which washed six of her crew out of the cockpit, and they were drowned. The Fleet wing was then obliged to lay-to for five hours under her double-reefed foresail. It was this race which, according to an historian, “lifted American yachting to a level with any in the world, and placed the New York Club on an equality with the Royal Yacht Squadron of Great Britain.” But an ocean race almost equally famous was sailed twenty years later, in tho spring of 1887, the Jubilee year.
In January, 1887, Mr. Bush, of the schooner yacht Coronet, challenged any American keel schooner to race across the Atlantic from New York to Queenstown, Ireland; each schooner competing to deposit a stake of $10,900. On January 16th, the Secretary of the Now York Yacht Club received the following acceptance :■—•
Digitized by LxOOQle
440
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
“ New Yoke Yacht Club,
“ New York, January 10, 1887.
“John H. Bird, Esq., Secretary, etc.
“Dear Sir,—In reference to the challenge of Captain Bush, of the Coronet, to sail any keel schooner yacht flying the American flag from Sandy Hook to Queenstown, I desire to state that the yacht Dauntless will be ready to sail such a race for $10,000 sweepstakes any time between the 1st and 15th March, according to the conditions named in said challenge.
“ Yours truly,
“C. H. Colt.”
No other owner came forward, and the contest therefore resolved itself into
'• WOULD THEN DIVE DOWS INTO BILLOWY DBEVH ” (p. 443).
a match between the Coronet and the Dauntless. Of the two the Coronet was the newer and slightly the larger boat. She had been built in 1885 for a comfortable cruiser, and much of her design Was due to the ingenuity of Captain Christopher S. Crosby, who now sailed her across the Atlantic. The Dauntless was originally the schooner L’HirondeUe, built as far back as 1866. Her first owner, Hr. Bradfort, sold her to Mr. James Gordon Bennett, who lengthened her bow and gave her the name of Dauntless. In 1882 Mr. Bennett sold her to Captain Caldwell H. Colt, who had made so many alterations in her that she was practically a new boat, or as good as new, when he accepted Mr. Bush’s challenge. Captain Colt was himself a keen practical seaman, and went with the Dauntless on her voyage. But he took the further precaution
Digitized by kjOOQle
COXONET v. DAUNTLESS, 1887.
441
of engaging the services of one Captain Samuel Samuels, a skipper who had made a brilliant reputation in the days of the famous American clipper
passenger ships.
The yachts started on Saturday, March 12th, from an imaginary line
“ ‘ RANG OX TOIL TOVE LIVES ! ’ ” (p. 443).
off Owls Head, New York Harbour, their destination being Roche’s Point, Queenstown, Ireland. The morning was bright, but bitterly cold with a moderate gale blowing from N.N.W. The harbour was crowded, nevertheless, and a whole fleet of tugs and steamers lay ready to speed the rivals some distance on their way. At 1 p.m. the first whistle was blown, and the starting whistle ten minutes later. The two yachts were late in getting out their topsails, and it was not until 1.21 p.m. that the Coronet crossed the line, some
Digitized by GOOQle
444
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
their fiendish embrace; all hope is lost, and we believe the end has come.. Suddenly, as if by magic, she rises upon the crest; the crisis is past, and we have the wind on the weather-bow and are safe for the present. A happy, contented smile seems to pass over tho face of Captain Crosby as he watches his little vessel riding each wave like a seabird. Those who are so sceptical as to doubt the efficacy of oil to lessen the dangerous effect of heavy seas would have been converted had they stood upon our weather-bow that afternoon and watched the waves breaking around us, while we rode in a harbour of almost smooth water in mid-ocean.
“We lay thus at the mercy of the wind and wave all night, with the waters of the Atlantic rolling on deck overhead. Suddenly, a huge wave strikes her weather-bow, she staggers back almost stunned; lights are out, darkness reigns supreme; the temperature rapidly lowering, indicating, possibly, our approach to an iceberg. Danger and love are not respecters of persons, and a glance at the interior of our cabin to-night will soon verify this. All those delicate works
“LAY ABOUND IN ONE CONFUSED MASS’’ (p. H5),
Digitized by GOOQle
THE CORONET WINS
445
OHEEXiinnE,
(From a Dialling by FK L. Wyllie, A.R.A.)
of art, tapestries, and handsome furnishings—so greatly admired while we lay at anchor in New York Harbour—have been removed and replaced by spare sails, spars, and cordage. It offers to-night a sanctuary to all; for misery loves company. Captain, officers, guests, cook, steward, and cabin-boy lay around in one confused mass, stowed away in the bunt of the squaresail or under the mess-table, and stealthily improvising everything within reach to keep dry. Fires have been put out by the sea, and, added to the discomfort of the water, comes intense cold—the temperature having gone down below freezing. All things must have an end, and so Boreas at last blew himself out. With the approach -of dawn came the bright sun, which .had kept himself hid from us since our departure. It requires such a night as we had just passed through to give one a thorough appreciation of a glorious sunshine. We were all on deck bright and early, and resembled more a hospital ship than a racing yacht. Everything portable was hung up to dry—boots, shoes, hats, coats, blankets, and bedding; in fact, the sea had not left a dry spot or article on board.”
In the end the Coronet won, passing Roche’s Point on the 27th of March, after a voyage of fourteen days, twenty-three hours, thirty-three minutes. The Gauntlet, which had been found to leak badly during the greater part of the course, did not arrive until the Monday evening following, having taken sixteen days, one hour, forty-three minutes. Both yachts then steered for the English Channeli-the Dauntless putting into Southampton and the Coronet into Cowes
Digitized by LnOOQle
446
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
to repair damages. A prize of 35,000 was offered tor the boats to race back to New York; but they had had enough of it, and small blame to them.
We have headed this chapter “ The Pleasures of the Sea;" but it is not everyone who would care to take his pleasure in the austere form which we have just been describing. To some men yachting means little more than yacht racing. Others are never so happy as when out of soundings. Others, again, creep from port to port in a comfortable cruiser, taking a fortnight's rest in every harbour they make, and only putting out in the finest weather. And, lastly, people have been known to call themselves yachtsmen whose idea of the pastime is to send the vessel round from one point to another while they themselves traverse the intermediate distance in a first-class railway carriage! True yacht sailing is, however, a very different affair from yachting of this last kind, and, when carried on with spirit, is anything but an idle recreation. “ For years,” wrote the late Mr. R. T. McMullen in the preface to his extremely interesting book “Down Channel,” “I have been accustomed to hear remarks implying that a yachtsman’s time must be heavy on hand and hard to kill It may be so in yachting proper, which consists chiefly in promenading on quays, esplanades, and piers, in suitable attire, of course, and in passing to and fro in a steam-launch or gig, with colours flying: a delight indulged in only by the extremely affluent, or by those who ought to be so. . . . If I may compare sailing with equestrian sports, I should say that yacht sailing stands in about the same relation to ‘yachting’ as the bun ting-fl eld does to Rotten Row. The comparison is inadequate; but those who know the delight of being well and comfortably housed after a long and hard day’s hunting in bad weather will understand the compensation to be found by the yachtsman in a quiet anchorage.”
That Mr. McMullen himself was a yachtsman of the sterner order is proved on every page of his book. But he never proved it more strikingly than by his magnificent feat of sailing the Orion, a yawl of 20 tons, single-handed, from Cherbourg to Dover, in the summer of 1877. By the courtesy of Mr. Horace Cox, the publisher of “ Down Channel,” we are allowed to condense the narrative of this famous performance, quoting Mr. McMullen from time to time when the story particularly' demands that he should tell it.
The Orion, which had been built for Mr. McMullen in 1865, was a yawl of 191 tons (builder's measurement). Her length over all was 48 feet, and on the water-line 441 feet; her beam 10 feet 2 inches. Afloat she drew 7 feet of water aft and 5 feet 6 inches forward.
Being unwell, and feeling the necessity for a sea change, Mr. McMullen left Greenhithe on July 13th, 1877, in ths Orion, with ten days’ provisions on board, intending to cruise down the coast of France as far as Cherbourg, anchoring now and then on the coast, if the scenery tempted him to land for a scramble on the cliff's or to take a trip in his small boat to examine the
Digitized byVrOOQlC
CRUISE OF THE OXIOX
447
shore, the caverns, etc., more closely. After a stay at Cherbourg, he intended to sail to Dartmouth, and take a month's pleasure among the Devonshire harbours, and finally to return up Channel to Greenhithe.
His crew consisted of two men, whom he calls Henry and George—omitting their surnames, since the part they play in the narrative is not a creditable one. Henry, an experienced seaman, had sailed with Mr. McMullen before, and knew his hard sailing habits. George, cook and seaman, was recommended by Henry, and warned beforehand that the cruise was not to be mere child’s play. He professed himself thoroughly satisfied. Both men had respectable homes, and both sent money there—instead of to the public-house. “ During the preliminary preparations I heard neither bad language nor quarrelling; all was so pleasant under the influence of ten hours’ sleep, home alternate nights, unlimited tobacco smoke, no fold winds, and no salt water, that at home I expressed regret that we were not bound to Scotland—a trip which necessitates much continuous sailing day and night. They talked freely of the cruise to Cherbourg—whither they had never been before—as if it were an anticipated pleasure.”
Under these hopeful circumstances the Orion sailed from Greenhithe on July 13th. Before reaching the Downs the men asked for an advance of two pounds each to send to their wives. As they were to be away from the English coast for two or three weeks, Mr. McMullen assented with pleasure, although they were in advance already. But no sooner was the money paid them than the grumbling began. At Dover, George, being told to help get the jib out, said he wanted to light the fire and clean out the forecastle; being sharply ordered to come, he made an exhibition of himself, and showed he was master of other than polite language. But upon Mr. McMullen’s threatening to send him on shore at once, he apologised, and promised to conduct himself better. At 8.30 a.m. on the 20th they cleared Dover harbour, and pointed across to the French coast. At mid-day it came on to blow rather fresh, knocking up a little short sea that made the vessel a trifle uncomfortable at the men’s dinner-time. Upon this, Henry came aft and took a seat on the mizzen-beam, saying “it was very hard they could not get their dinner in peace, but must have it spoilt with sea water.” The chain-pipe—for which a proper cover was provided—being left uncovered through their own negligence, a little water had run down on the table. If they had much more of this (they said), they should leave at Dartmouth. Disgusted with this childish nonsense, Mr. McMullen put back to Dungeness Road that night, and next morning called upon each man separately to state if he wished to leave the vessel or to go on with the cruise. If they chose the latter, he demanded a promise that they would not repeat their ridiculous complaints. They at once chose to remain, promised faithfully to give up grumbling, to behave civilly, and take the rough and smooth together, like men.
Accordingly, on the evening of the 22nd Mr. McMullen started again. By
Digitized by
Google
448
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
6.30, on the morning of the 23rd, Beachy Head bore N. by £ 15 miles. “My two poor men, having had only six hours each below during the night, were in such a languid and sleepy state that, as the sea was a little rough, I let them off the washing down. After breakfast, one turned in for three hours; and after dinner, the other ditto. Besides that, I saw comparatively little of them; for directly I took the helm, they were away down forward with some excuse
Photo. Sy^oviU d? Co., Purtmoxa. A ONB-TOS YACHT.
or other, and immediately there was a smell of pipe. They were always complaining of the heat of the forecastle, with little reason, one would suppose, since they were continually lolling about down there, smoking, in harbour and at sea.’’
At 8 p.m., the weather looking dirty, they hove-to and took two reefs down. Henry’s share of the first reef was taken so carelessly that, if the third and fourth reefs had been required, the points would not have mot. As he was unwilling to alter them and disposed to be insolent, Mr. McMullen took in the slack himself. At 8.45 they made a good landfall—the light of Cape Barfleur, distant twenty miles, appearing on the weather bow. As Mr. McMullen had not slept at all on the passage, he requested that both men would keep the
Digitized by GOOQle
Digitized by
Google
YACHTING: REPAIRING DAMAGES.
8
Digitized by GOOQle
ARRIVAL AT CHERBOURG.
449
deck, and give him a short rest until they came up -with the dangerous and rocky coast of Barfleur, where the difficulties of making Cherbourg at night or in thick weather begin. Notwithstanding this request, Henry went below and turned in at 9 o’clock, which compelled Mr. McMullen to be up again, as it was not safe for only one man to be on deck in bad weather, and in the track of the Havre navigation. “ At midnight, abreast of the Cape, I called Henry
^Violet tjr Nymafuk st Co , Z^wuf*.
A UACM BETWEEN 20-TON YACHTS.
on deck, when George went below and stayed there. Shortly after Henry took the helm, I asked him (from below) if Cape Levi light was broad on the bow. He answered, ‘ That he should not call it on the bow at all, but on the beam, and Barfleur light on the quarter’—which was untrue and misleading. Had I taken his word for it, and told him to luff a point or two, instead of looking up to see for myself, we should have been in dreadful peril." As it was, at 1 a.m. the wind shifted to the north-west in a heavy squall and put them on a lee shore with a nasty, chopping sea. The lights were all lost in heavy rain, and there was no one on deck to let go a halliard or tend a sheet. Fortunately, they were able to carry on until Mr. McMullen put her about, and thus escaped an awkward situation. Heaving-to for daylight, they drifted so far out that it was 5 in the morning before they were able to get inside Cherbourg breakwater; and at 6 o’clock they came to anchor off the town. Iliis ended the first part of the cruise.
Mr. McMullen spent some days at Cherbourg, visiting the town, sailing about inside the breakwater, and always considering a way out of his difficulty.
29
Digitized by Tooele
450 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
To dismiss a crew at a foreign port is seldom an easy matter; and Mr. McMullen, too, had very strong opinions on the relations between servant and employer. It vexed him that the men should go home and report that they had been cruelly overworked, kept sailing all day, and allowed no proper rest at night The reverse was the fact; the difficulty would be to prove it against the statements of two idle men, reckless of the truth. At last, he hit upon a plan, and a strange one.
On the 27 th the men began to grumble again at the spick and span order in which they were compelled to keep the yacht. They gave it as their opinion that “ she ought to be under a glass case in the park.” And at breakfast-time Henry came aft and announced that as Mr. McMullen was dissatisfied with his work, and “he was sure he always did his very best,” he should give a week’s notice to leave at Dartmouth. Mr. McMullen said: “ Very well” In the afternoon George also gave notice that he intended to leave at Dartmouth, and this notice was accepted with equal cheerfulness. Mr. McMullen had, in fact—though he did not tell them this—just returned from making inquiries about a steamer to carry them away.
The next morning his mind was made up: they should go neither to Dartmouth nor home with him. “ I determined,” he writes, " to prove how unmanly and contemptible were their complaints by taking sole charge, and, if possible, working back single-handed the way we came out. A feeling of gratification and relief came over me at having hit upon a punishment neither harsh nor revengeful, but that was ignominious and contemptuous for men unjustly whining about overwork.”
This was on Saturday. On Monday Mr. McMullen went on shore, ascertained the expense to London, and that the steamer would start next night at 10 o’clock. On his return he went forward to announce as much of his purpose as he chose that they should know. He began by informing them that the idea of the cruise to Dartmouth had been abandoned owing to their conduct, and continued: “ I remember, the first day out, you said that you hated the sea. Your notices prove that you desire to join your families as soon as possible. Now there is a chance of your doing so by a steamer sailing from here to-morrow, and you had better avail yourselves of it” They were surprised at first, and a fuss ensued about being dismissed at a foreign port. Mr. McMullen said, “ Very well, you may please yourselves. You owe me a week’s service from to-day. If you refuse my terms, whatever the weather is—if we have four reefs down—I intend to go to sea to-morrow, and have a cruise for my own pleasure to the Land’s End. You can serve your time and be landed at an English port, or go by the steamer to Southampton. I will leave you to make your choice.”
Within a very few minutes the men had decided to leave by the steamer.
The next day Mr. McMullen employed them in housing the topmasts, trimming and feeding the lanterns, and preparing extra tackles for the work he
Digitized byVvOOQlC
PREPARATIONS FOR STARTING ALONE.
451
had in mind. They probably thought they were doing these little jobs for the incompetent foreign crew that Mr. McMullen would engage in their place. Certainly they never had the faintest suspicion of the truth when, that evening, they put their bags in the boat and Mr. McMullen saw them off for England; nor had he allowed the least hint to escape him. He had, however, as a matter of common prudence, confided his intention to a resident at Cherbourg, and had met with every kind of dissuasion.
At sea the Orion’s boat was carried bottom up on one side of the deck; and, as she weighed about two hundredweight, it needed two men to turn her over and stow her in this narrow place without, damaging her or the cabin skylights. On his way back, therefore, Mr. McMullen asked a boat's crew belonging to another yacht that lay near—the Dachshund—to come aboard and help him with this job.
He arrived back alongside the Orion at 7.30, hooked on the davit-tackles, jumped aboard, and hoisted up his boat at once, a bit at a time, first one end and then the other; then, while waiting for the Dachshund’s men to come and turn her over, changed his shore-going clothes for a light working-suit. Time passed, and he was already devising a tackle for doing tho job single-handed when a boat came alongside with three gentlemen from the Dachshund who had kindly come instead of the men. After they had turned over the boat for him and settled it in its place, one said, “ Surely you are not going to take this vessel to sea by yourself ? ” Mr. McMullen asked to be excused from making any reply, and appealed to them as gentlemen to abstain from setting about any rumours of his purpose. This they promised to do, and, wishing him " Good-night,” went back to their own vessel.
After an exceedingly hot day the night was cloudy and close, with every appearance of a storm. This fortunately hold off. Mr. McMullen had a heavy night’s work before him, and that he got through it without exhaustion is partly due to the excellent care he took of himself. “ Sufficient brandy was burnt to fill an ordinary flask: two pint bottles of good champagne, to be taken in small doses, were placed in readiness, and a patent tap screwed into one of them for immediate use; and shortly after getting to heavy work, being exposed to the night air, necessarily in a state of semi-nudity, I went below and put a nine-inch band of flannel three times round the loins. It may be well to explain that burning brandy for a minute or so modifies the injurious properties, and renders it softer and more palatable to invalids and those who dislike it. My medicine, however, was outside the breakwater, and out there I was determined to find it”
His first business was to secure everything movable below—in cabins, pantry, and forecastle; cans, buckets, cooking utensils, glass, and crockery; to stow all needless ropes and tackles, and place the needful ones where they would be handy. This being finished, at 9.30 the work on deck wras begun by taking the covers off the mainsail and stowing them. " Let no one be surprised
Digitized by^OOQlC
452
THE STORY OF THE SEA,
to hear that, notwithstanding my hands were in first-rate working order, I considered it essential to put on a pair of calf-skin gloves. The laughable sight they presented in the morning quite justified their use, and proved conclusively that it would have been impossible to get through the work without them.”
hundredweight and a half
To take a couple of reefs in a mainsail containing a
/ A .5 by Symt nAa 4f fo., Pyrt^t>k'^.
TWO-AND-A-HALF TON YACHT.;
of canvas is severe work for one man. When there is no one to help, you must hold it on to the boom with one leg, or sit upon it, while tying the reef points. And stout canvas is very obstinate. Directly the full muscular power of the hands is relaxed to bring the points together, it slacks out and must be done again; and sometimes Mr. McMullen had to use his teeth as well as his hands for holding the points. The story of that night’s work is too long to be told in detail Mr. McMullen had the riding-light to work by, and shifted it as required, from one point of the rigging to another. It is
enough to say that by 2 o’clock in the morning all was ready for the start; and Mr, McMullen went below, had supper, and dozed until awakened at 4.30 A.M. by a gun from one of the forts. It was' still very cloudy, but there was a breeze from W.N.W. After awash to freshen up, he went on deck for the final effort of lifting the anchor. ' ■ ■
“ There were twenty-two fathoms of chain out The first operation was to heave in twelve fathoms, One end of the handle ships-on the windlass,'the ether
Digitized by
Google
HEAVING THE ANCHOR.
453
into an eyebolt on the gunwale. This handle, worked round and round, gives quick delivery; but it is hard work. On the opposite end of the barrel of the windlass an American patent is fitted; this, working fore and aft with a long straight lever, delivers slowly, but is less laborious. I used first one and then the other, according as the vessel sheered, and made it lighter or heavier; but it was nearly all heavy, and explained itself soon enough by bringing the anchor—a
Porter s patent — to the surface, crown first, at seven fathoms, trailing the other fifteen fathoms along the bottom. I said to myself, ‘Oh! here’s a pretty mess.’ By some means, difficult to explain, a half-hitch was taken on the tumbler at the back of the palm, and the weight of chain beyond kept it fast. I got a luff tackle on the forestay, and hooked the crown of the anchor; but it was too much for me without a second tackle, which I was hastening to procure. Driving first in the direction of a schooner at anchor.
“SOMETIMES HAD TO VSE HIS TEETH ” (p. 452).
when clear of that—in consequence of the wind northing—towards the shoal water, the situation was most trying.”
Fortunately, at this moment, Mr. McMullen spied a fishing-boat turning to windward, and, hailing it, asked for assistance. The men came under the Orion’s bow after lowering sail, rested the anchor on the bow of their large boat, and cleared it in a minute. Unfortunately, the politeness of these Frenchmen went a bit further. Generously ignoring Mr. McMullen’s suggestion that their kindness might end here, they proceeded, to his secret mortification— for he did not choose to tell how matters stood on board—to lay the anchor out again. However, smiling pleasantly, he managed to crib three or four fathoms of chain whilst they were doing it Having paid them and waited till they were far in the distance, he set to work again. Having set jib, foresail, and mizzen, and, by an overpowering lift, managed to fish the anchor (that is, to get its Huke to rest on the gunwale), he proceeded to hoist away at the
Digitized by LnOOQle
454
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
mainsail, throat and peak alternately, and passed outside Cherbourg breakwater at 8.45 a.m., just four hours after beginning work in the morning.
Mr. McMullen’s intention, if the wind were foul or very light, was to work the French half of the Channel for 130 miles; if free, to sail 100 miles E. £ N., when Beachy Head should bear N.N.W. 24 miles, then oct according to circumstances. His prime object was to avoid, during the dark hours, the tracks frequented by shipping. "I do not know the proportion; but my belief, perhaps an erroneous one, is that for one vessel larger than a fishing smack on the French side of mid-Channel, there are fifteen or twenty on the other.
“ The appearance overhead was just that of a storm having expended itself elsewhere. The clouds were dividing into heavy masses from N.N.W., the lower scud and the wind from N. by E,, fresh enough for the reefed sail, and so cold to me that, when clear of the outer rock of Pelee, it was necessary to clothe accordingly, and take a little strong, much-needed refreshment
“ Looking up a point to windward of the course, she steered herself well; while, being made hungry by the brandy and biscuit, I now attempted a real breakfast before getting into the race off Cape Levi. Wanting time to boil water for cocoa, I thought, * Why not do a little French, and call it second breakfast ? ’ So I lodged on the end of a sofa, clear of the movements of the swing table, rushing up the ladder every two minutes to see if all were going right, and down again for another mouthful of stale bread, butter, and potted meat (dreadful rubbish), topping up with a tumbler of claret.
“ Before breakfast everything had settled down into fair working order. The main and mizzen sheets were moderately easy; the head-sails, sheeted hard and flat as boards, were intended to remain so throughout the passage. The halliards were all coiled and toggled to keep them in their places. The sun, shining out gloriously at times, made the coast and dark green sea look charming. . . . Was I tired ? No. Vexation and disappointment make one weary. Everything went right. Supplied with water, provisions, and fuel for a month; in a beautiful little well-found ship of undoubted capacity and power, of which not only every timber and plank, but every spar, sail, and rope, were known to me, there ought to have been, and there was, a degree of confidence and contentment that went a long way to neutralise fatigue.
“ With a seven-knot breeze for my moderate canvas, there was plenty of sea through the races, which are marked by lines of broken water at intervals for several miles out of Cherbourg, and are caused by strong tidal currents running over irregular depths. After a few warnings which it would have been imprudent to neglect, I put on my waterproofs in time to save a terrible drencher off Cairo Levi that came tumbling in forward and over the boat like a cataract, filled the deck, and would have washed mo from the tiller if I had not seen it coming and taken two or three extra turns of the tiller-rope and held on tight. Fortunately there was nobody to cry out about it and ‘give
Digitized by^OOQlC
ALONE IN THE ORION.
455
notice to leave,’ so it was soon forgotten in more congenial excitements when my neck and shirt-sleeves began to dry up again.”
At 1 rm. Mr. McMullen lost sight of land. He passed a fishing-boat out of Cherbourg, a schooner off Barfleur, and saw one of the great Havre steamships homeward bound from America. Besides these, throughout the day he only noticed two or three small vessels crossing his course. He continued to support himself at intervals with a little food and drink, but never took anything until compelled by necessity, nor for a single instant thought of smoking. To have prepared a meal he must have pointed the Orion's nose close to the wind, in which position she might have been left to steer herself for awhile during the cooking operations. But this, of course, meant slower progress, while Mr. McMullen preferred to run free and fast, even though this required constant watchfulness at the wheel Of course, he had to leave the helm at times; and once, while he was below, the vessel gybed and broke the mizzen-boom away from its sheet It took some time to repair damages, and darkness had fallen before the sail was trimmed again. The next business was to light the binnacle-lamp and get out the port and starboard lights. " Each lantern was a separate job, and necessitated a carefid, crouching walk forward along the lee scuppers, holding on by the ridge-rope, with the sea washing up over the ankles. As after this my hands had to be washed below, I took tho precaution to wear gloves when handling them again. Then there was the log to haul in every two hours, to see it was not choked with weed—a very common occurrence in the Channel—and the mileage to be taken at the binnacle light (this, more often than not, pours a little stream down one’s sleeve) ; the lanterns to be frequently inspected and twice taken below, one at a time, to remove the char and keep them burning with proper brilliancy; the binnacle light ditto. Waterproofs twice peeled off’—below, of course—to put on extra clothing towards morning, the chart to be attended to and marked, and entries to be made on the slate, besides that ever-recurring matter of refreshment. If all this were not enough to check a disposition to sleep, there was cold water enough flying about—chiefly rebounding from the boat on the deck—to keep one quite up to the mark; I fancy the man at the helm occasionally heard some rather ill-tempered remarks about this.”
One vessel only—a steamer—was seen by Mr. McMullen during the night. At midnight he made Beachy Head light, bearing N. by E. 20 miles. At daybreak he saw the hills of Fairleigh; and at 5,45 passed Dungeness against tide, steering a trifle out of his course to avoid some vessels in company bound up Channel At 9,45 he was off Shakespeare’s Cliff. “ I threw off the heavy clothing, and prepared for work. Backed the foresail, rounded-to, hauled aft main- and mizzen-sheets, triced up bobstay with a watch tackle, cleared the halyards for letting go, uncovered chain-pipe, cast off chain-stopper below, and got the anchor ready. Bore up again for Dover, and lowered the foresail. This reads as if it were done in five minutes; but it was hard work, and occupied
Digitized by Google
456
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
me a long while. Thus prepared, I stood in for the anchorage, and brought up off the town at 11 o’clock, twenty-seven hours from the time of heaving up off Cherbourg ”
The first 130 miles from Cherbourg breakwater had been done in 20 hours; the last 18 miles, to Shakespeare’s Cliff, in 5 hours against tide. With a reefed mainsail and flattened headsails, this was very good going. As soon as
the Orion was moored, the Custom House officers came on board and asked:
“ Have you anything on board Hable to duty ?"
“ Nothing. My custom has always been to have a sufficient supply of everything from L o n d o n—d u t y paid; never to take anything out of bond; and never to purchase stores of any sort in a foreign port.”
“ But you cannot answer for the crew ? ”—“ Yes ; I can.”
“How can you possibly do that, sir?”—“Because I can, and do.”
“ Haven’t you got any crew ? ”—“ No.”
“ What have you done with them ? ”—“ Unshipped them at Cherbourg because the work was too heavy.”
“ Have you sailed this vessel over all alone ? ”—“ Yes.’’
“ But they may have left something behind ? ’’
“Nothing worth a halfpenny between the two, I’ll guarantee; but there is the vessel open to you from end to end; I shall be happy to submit everything to examination.”
“ That will do, sir.—Good afternoon.”
After this adventure Mr. McMullen sailing, though, of course, in smaller boats
became a devotee of single-handed than the Orion. His last boat was
Digitized by^OOQlC
mr. McMullen's last, cruise.
457
the Perseus, a small six-ton lugger. In her, on the 10th of June, 1891, he sailed away from Greenhitlie in the high spirits usual with him when setting
out on a lonely
cruise. On the morning of the 13th he landed and posted a letter at Eastbourne ; then boarded the Pe..... a/ain. and went on down Channel The next heard of him was a telegram saying
THR BRITAN NT A..
PhulQ. SytHWda & Co-, fortiNiotah.
that he had been found dead on the evening of June 15th by some French fishermen. He was sitting in the cockpit, with his face turned towards the sky, and the vessel sailing herself along. The. weather, was fine, the breeze light, and a
Digitized by
Google
458 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
young moon shining on the placid sea. His body was landed at Beuzeval (about six miles west of Trouville); there, on the 19th, he was buried. It can easily be believed (says Mr. Dixon Kemp) that his end was exactly as he would have wished it to be. The sea had for him just that
- Mystic spell
Which none but sailors know or feel, And none but they can tell.
And he died upon the sea, sitting in the cockpit of the little Perseus, his face towards the sky, whilst she was sailing up the silver path of the moon, which seemed to unite heaven and the sea.
The story of the evolution of the modern racing yacht—of the stages between Mr. Commissioner Pett’s boat, in which King Charles beat his brother, and such modern ocean greyhounds as the Britannia and Vigilant—would fill a chapter by itself. Yachts of different size, when racing against each other, are, of course, subject to time allowance. Now the size of a yacht may be measured in a good many different ways, and each separate way will give an advantage to a different type of vessel. Consequently, as soon as any alteration is made in the rule of measurement, new vessels are built expressly to escape, as far as possible, the penalties of that rule. The original rule—the “old ’94" rule, as it was called—took nothing into account but length and beam, the latter being taxed twice over: and, of course, builders discovered that by paring down the beam of a boat, and increasing her depth and her ballast, a boat could be made to carry more sail than a broad-beamed rival which, perhaps, ranked above her in tonnage and had to allow her time. Yachts grew narrower and narrower, until they came almost to justify the story told of an American who asked a friend on this side to buy a typical British five-ton cutter and send it across to him. It was brought across and launched in New York Bay, and the owner invited one or two friends to come for a sail On coming alongside, the first to get out of the dinghy took hold of the runner, and taking a wide step, so as to jump into the centre of the boat, stepped clean over the other side and went plump into the water. At any rate, the old tonnage rule produced a very unwholesome type of ship in the merchant service as well as among yachts. Turn back to our account of the loss of the London. She, in her day (1865), was considered the very last triumph of ship-building. Every resource of science had been called upon by her owners, Messrs. Money Wigram. What happened ? She was sunk by the water which slopped on to her decks; she could not live out a gale which was weathered by the smallest of her open boats. A long and very narrow ship is always a wet ship, since she goes through the water, and not over it; moreover, sho is bound to roll when running, especially if (as is always the case with a racing yacht), she carries big
Digitized by GOOQle
“EATING.”
459
spars. Again, it is very dangerous to lay her head to in bad weather. And finally, the greater the length of keel that has to be brought round in tacking, the more likely she is to miss stays. The - late Henry Kingsley, writing in condemnation of the long and narrow type of vessel at the time of its latest vogue, tells that he heard a pilot say to a captain once on board the Gauntlet, which either won or nearly won the race from China afterwards, “ I can’t get your ship about; if you can’t do it yourself, she will be ashore in ten minutes!” The skipper took charge again and just managed it, with about as ugly a surf bursting half a mile to leeward as anyone would wish to see. And again—“ I remember once being in one of those horribly weltering sixty-foot seas which one, I believe, only gets in the Southern Ocean, when I saw a tiny cockle-shell of a brig, about 200 tons, faring on her way, at one time as high up over our heads (or so it seemed) as our mainyard, in about another minute after sinking slowly, slowly down in the hideous grey valley beneath our feet; yet she was floating comfortably like a cork, making, as the mate said, much better weather of it than we were. Once when she was below, as I held hard by the rigging and looked down on her, there were two men at her wheel and a man in blue —I suppose the captain—standing comfortably by them,' and a little dog, who ran to and fro and seemed to bark at us—though if he had barked within three feet of your ear the sound would have been lost in the wild rushing and raging of the winds and the waters around. No dogs could have run about much on our desolate storm-washed deck. We must have been a splendid spectacle to them, hurling our magnificent length at every conceivable angle, and in at least one-half of all possible positions before and through the following sea. Yet I doubt they did not envy us.”
The disadvantages of taxing beam became at length so pronounced that in the autumn of 1886 a committee of the Yacht Racing Association, after listening to a deal of expert evidence, determined to do away with the old tonnage rule altogether, and rate a boat only by its length and the area of sail it carried. This rule had already in 1883 been adopted for second-class racing, and may be expressed by the following formula:—
Length x sail area English rating = ------—---------.
But whereas the old rule overtaxed beam, the new one has tended to do away with displacement—that is, with the honest body of a yacht in which its owner and its crew are supposed to live. The modern type of boat is rapidly becoming a shallow dish with an immense bulb stuck on to tho bottom to counteract the pressure on the immense sails above. That these boats will sail very fast is undisputed; and for a small sailing-boat in which a man wants only to sit and steer for an hour or two the type may do well enough. But for larger boats perhaps it is the worst ever developed. In the words of the great yacht-de signer, Mr. G. L. Watson, “ Expensive to build, expensive to
Digitized by LnOOQle
460
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
handle, without head-room, or indeed room of any kind inside, they would thrash themselves to pieces in any sea but for the admirable manner in which they have been put together. A season—or, at most, two—sees the end of their success as racers; then they must be broken up, or sold for a mere song, as they are quite useless for cruising" So strongly do the best yacht-builders feel upon this point that in the autumn of 1892 they met and addressed a circular to the Yacht Racing Association, pointing out the deteriorating tendency of the rule, and continuing:—
“We take it that the general yachting public require in a yacht that she shall be safe in all conditions, of wind and weather, that she shall combine the maximum of room on deck and below with the minimum of prime cost, and
that she shall be driven as
Pii^lO. <S^/AC5da (t Co^ PtrrfmwidA,
the airiym.
fast as may be with the least expendr lire of labour < o. that she shall have a moderate and workable sailing area. Therefore, as but few men can afford to build for racing, and for racing only, and as the racer of to-day is the cruiser of a few years hence, any
Digitized by
Google
CENTRE-BOARD k KEEL.
461
rating rule should by its limitations encourage such a wholesome type of vessel”
There are signs that these representations will be listened to before long; but up to the present the Yacht Racing Association has taken no decisive steps.
The competition between English and American yachts has gradually resolved itself into a battle between the fixed keel, with cutter-rig (English type), and the drop-keel or centre-board, with sloop-rig (American type). The invention of the centre-board is a1 natural outcome of the shallow waters and sand-banks of the American coast. For sailing in shallow water, or for speed when running before the wind, a shallow boat is, of course, preferable; but for sailing on a wind—and this is the most important part of sailing—a boat must have a plenty of keel below water, or she is blown bodily to leeward. A centre-board, which can be hauled up when running and. dropped when beating to windward, has, of course, many advantages; but, for the deeper waters of their coast, British yachtsmen still pin their faith to the keel The unhappy accident which befel Lord Dunraven’s Valkyrie at the beginning of the season of 1894—when she was sunk in the Clyde by collision with Mr. Clarke’s Satanita—prevented our learning what she would do in her own waters against the American Vigilant, who had beaten her on the other side for the America's Cup. But the Vigilant did not have a triumphant career in her encounters with the Prince of Wales’s cutter Britannia. Out of seventeen starts the Britannia won twelve and the Vigilant five times; and the amazing series of misfortunes which befel the Vigilant’s centre-board towards the close of the season, and time after time prevented her from crossing the starting-line, went a long way to confirm the Briton in his prejudice against the Yankee type.
Digitized by GOOQle
CHAPTER XIX.
INTERNATIONAL YACHTING.
The Race of 1851 for the R.Y.S. Cup—The America Wins—The Cup presented to tho New York Yacht Club as a perpetual Challenge Trophy—Early Attempts to win it back—1870, Mr. Ashbury and the Cambria—A. Race across tho Atlantic—Cambria arrives first—Has to Sail against a Fleet—1871, Mr. Ashbury tries again—-The .Eiconio—A Disputed Race—Unpleasantness between Mr. Ashbury and the N.Y.Y.C. —1885, Sir Richard Sutton trios with tho Gent tin—She is Beaten by the Puritan— 1886, Lieutenant Henn and his Galatea—The Galatea v. Mayflower Races—Tho Mayflowrr Victorious —1887, the Thietle Challenges—Her Races with the Volunteer—Contest not renewed until 1893— Activity on both sides of tho Atlantic—Lord Dunraven Challenges with the Valkyrie—Valkyrie v. Vigilant—A. Splendid Finish.
IN the month of May, 1851—the year of the first Great Exhibition—the Royal Yacht Squadron of England offered a £100 Cup for competition among yachts of all nations and of any rig, the course being around the Isle of Wight, starting and finishing at Cowes. There was no time allowance. Eighteen yachts entered—nine schooners and nine cutters. Among the former was the since-famous yacht America, which had been sent across the Atlantic by Mr. John C. Stevens, Commodore of the New York Yacht Club, expressly to lower the colours of all British rivals. Commodore Stevens was really tho father of yacht-racing in America. He and his brothers lived in Hoboken, which faces New York across the river; and since, in tho early days of the century, the ferry between Hoboken and New York was slow and uncertain, the brothers had each a boat built, and crossed the river by sail or oar when- . ever they pleased. Constant practice not only gave them great skill in boatsailing, but awakened a love of the pursuit and a passion for experimenting.
The first craft of any importance owned by John C. Stevens was a 20-foot boat, called the Diver, built in 1809. In 1816 he owned the Trouble, a pirogue 56 feet in length. In the course of the next fifteen years he was continually making experiments with new craft, and in 1832 turned out the schooner Wave (65-feet water-line), which bent all the yachts in Boston in 1835 and 1836. Wo next find him with the Onkahya, a schooner of 250 tons ; and in 1844 he
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE AMERICA WINS THE CUP. 463
appears on board the Gimcrack, a slightly smaller vessel, with a sort of fin keel. It was in the little cabin of the Gimcrack that the famous New York Yacht Club was founded. With the formation of .this Club, interest in yachting seemed suddenly to awake in the States. A yachting fleet sprang up, and the designing and building of racing and pleasure craft became a profession in itself, enlisting the talents of several able men, foremost among whom was George Steers, who designed and built the America for Commodore Stevens and a “syndicate”—as we should call it nowadays—of New York yachtsmen. She was a boat of 170 tons, schooner rigged, measuring 83 feet on the waterline and 22 feet 6 inches in beam. In comparison with British yachts of that day she had two striking peculiarities. Her bow was long and fine, whereas our boats were built with full round bows and a body gradually tapering towards tho stern in the style then generally known as “ cod’s head and mackerel’s tail;" and, secondly, her sails were made to stand much flatter than ours, so much so that when close hauled her sails, if looked at edge on, were barely visible.
The race was sailed around the Isle of Wight on Friday, May 9 th, and the America quickly showed her heels to our schooners. “I could not believe nay eyes,” writes Sir Edward Sullivan. “ It was blowing a stiff breeze, and whilst all the other schooners were laying over ten or twelve degrees, she was sailing perfectly upright, and going five knots to their four. It was a revelation. 1 How does she do it ? ’ was in everybody’s mouth.” It is a question whether she would have dealt so easily with our cutters if luck had not been on her side. Three of the best of them were put out of the race. The famous Arrow ran aground in Sandown Bay; the Alarm had to bring up and go off to her assistance ; and the Volante collided with the Freak, and carried away her bowsprit. At any rate, the Yankee won, with loss of her jibboom; the three first arrivals being the America (170) at 8.37; Aurora, cutter (47), at 8.45; the Bacchante, cutter (80), at 9.30. The end of the race was little better than a drifting match. It should be said, too, that the Aurora was known to be inferior to all the three disabled cutters, and that the America had gained considerable advantage by breaking a rule, and not going round the Nab Light She was not disqualified, however, and the Cup went across the Atlantic.
This Cup was afterwards presented by her owners to the New York Yacht Club as a perpetual Challenge Cup to be sailed for by yachts of all nations; and in the rooms of the New York Yacht Club it remains to this day. On this side of the Atlantic it is known os the America, or America’s Cup; over there they call it Queen's Cup, but, as we have shown, it is really the Royal Yacht Squadron Cup. It is not precisely a beautiful object, since it belongs to a period when workmanship in silver was perhaps at its lowest ebb; but for the possession of this insignificant piece of plate nations will continue to do battle and pour out money as eagerly as if its artistic worth were that of a Dresden Madonna. Again and again have Englishmen
Digitized by LnOOQle
464
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
built yachts find sailed across the Atlantic for the express purpose of bringing it home, but hitherto without success. !It is doubtful if they eVer will succeed, since the conditions of the contest favour the holders; but it is certain that they will continue to try.
The first attempt to win back the Cup was not made till 1870. Two years before, Michael Ratsey, of Cowes, had built for Mr. James Ashbury a schooner of
Photo. Symoudt & Co^ Port rmoidh.
188 tons called the Cambria. Having raced her with varying success in the home waters, her owner determined to challenge for the Cup, and arranged a race across the Atlantic with Mr. James Gordon Bennett, an American gentleman, and owner of the schooner Dauntless, for a prize worth £250. The course was from Gaunt Head, Ireland, to the Sandy Hook lightship off New York, and the two schooners started on July 4th, 1870. The Cambria took the Northern passage, go trig as far north as latitude 50°; while the American, which was a bigger boat, chose a straighter and more southerly course. Each Was navigated by an old merchant captain, and they arrived on July 27th at the following times:—Cambria, 3.30 P.M.'; Dauntless, 4.47 p.m.—a difference of ohe hour seventeen minutes in a race of three thousand miles. The yachts, of course, were sailing under different conditions; but - this seems to make the
Digitized by
Google
"CORINTHIAN” YACHT RACE AT THE MOUTH OF THE THAMES. (From a Drawing by W. D Wyllie, ^.AJ.)
30
Digitized by GOOQle
466 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
closeness of the race all the more singular. The whole of New York turned out to see the Britisher who had come to do battle for the Cup. In the graphic words of the historian, “ The mosquitoes at Sandy Hook fed on a small army of reporters for a week before she arrived;” and Mr. Ashbury’s movements were chronicled in the daily papers as Lord Dunraven's were in 1893. On the day of the race, which was August 8th, 1870, nearly all “ down-town ” business was suspended, and Broad and New Streets were well-nigh deserted, for all New York had gathered in excursion steamers to see.
The Cambria had to sail for the Cup against twenty-five schooners of the New York Yacht Club, of sizes varying from 262 down to 83 tons. New York Yacht Club measurement, the Cambria being rated at 227 tons. Mr. Ashbury protested against this, claiming that the word " match ” in the deed of gift meant a contest between two vessels only, and that the New York Club ought to pit a single representative vessel against the Cambria ; but the Club, by a vote of eighteen to one, decided that, inasmuch as the America had won the Cup by sailing against a whole fleet of vessels, so all subsequent challengers must do the same. They forgot, or ignored, that the nature of a contest had been altered in the interim by the presentation of the Cup to the Club as a perpetual challenge trophy. As it was, the race could hardly be a satisfactory one. The course was through the Narrows, round Sandy Hook lightship, and return; and in the narrow waters the Cambria was much bothered by other vessels, with one of which she came into collision, carrying away a fore-port shroud and fore-topmast backstay, and damaging her fore-crosstrees. Soon after she lost her weakened fore-topmast, and this put an end to her chance. The race was won by the little Magic, of 93 tons, the Cambria being eighth or tenth, and the Cup was thus kept for the New York Yacht Club.
Mr, Ashbury was not daunted. Before leaving America he promised to return next summer and try for the Cup with a new schooner; and early in 1871 he brought out the Livonia, of 265 tons, built for him by Michael Ratsey, of Cowes. Already, during the winter, the New York Yacht Club had begun to protect itself after its own manner by altering its rule of measurement, substituting cubical contents for superficial area, and thus giving the American, or skimming dish, type of yacht an advantage over tho British deep keel.
Although the Livonia was built expressly to challenge for the Cup, her performances before leaving English waters were not altogether satisfactory. She was twice beaten by the famous Egeria, and once by the equally famous Aline, a defeat which led to the insertion of the following couplet in Punch:—
Oh! Livonia, I wouldn’t own yer, Now I've seen the grand Aline.
But Mr. Ashbury was determined to see the thing through, and on October 1st,
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE CAMBRIA AND LIVONIA.
467
1871, the Livonia reached New York, after a very boisterous passage of nearly twenty-nine days.
To begin with, she had been allowed to come out on the strength of a misunderstanding. The position is best explained in the words of Captain R. F. Coffin, of the New York Yacht Club, a writer who is not usually inclined to give an Englishman the benefit of any doubt He says: " As that gentleman (Mr. Ashbury) has been somewhat misrepresented, I will state exactly what his proposition was. He was to come representing twelve different clubs, and in his letter he says distinctly: 1 If the Livonia shall win a majority of the races, the Cup would then go to the club under whose flag I sailed in the last and final race; ’ and he wanted a scries of twelve races. He has been represented as desiring to sail twelve races, and if he won one out of the tivelve to take the Cup. I feel like saying that Mr. Ashbury was not treated over and above fairly by the New York Club, and am glad to have him set right on this important point.
“ As I have said, the Club received this proposition at a regular Club meeting, and some of the members were in favour of replying and rejecting a proposition which no one at the meeting ever dreamed of accepting. Others, however, said, ' Let him come, and we’ll make terms with him after he gets here;' and Mr. Ashbury was induced to bring the Livonia here under the impression that the propositions contained in his letter of August 12th, which was submitted at this meeting, had been accepted.”
The surviving donor of the Cup having protested against a repetition of the farce of 1870, when one British schooner had to knock her way among seventeen Americans, the New York Yacht Club decided that, in accordance with the intention of the deed of gift, only one vessel should in future compete against the challenger; but they reserved power to select the Cup defender on the morning of the race, according to the weather—a light weather yacht for light winds; a more powerful one if the wind were strong—and they selected the two keel schooners Sappho and Dauntless and the two centre-board schooners Columbia and Palmer to choose from. Mr. Ashbury vainly protested against this not very sportsmanlike proceeding, claiming that, as he had but one vessel, so only one should be put against her for the whole series of races; but he finally yielded his point, and the match was made up on the Americans’ terms —to consist of the best four out of seven races, three of which were to be over the Club course, and four over a course twenty miles to windward (or leeward) from the Sandy Hook lightship and return. The first match was sailed on Monday, October 16th, over the Club course, and, the wind being very light, the Club selected a light weather centre-boarder, the Columbia. She beat the Livonia by twenty-five minutes.
The second race took place on the following Wednesday, October 18th, and again the Columbia was selected. There was a good breeze from W.N.W. this time, and the race was to be sailed over the outer course/but the Club, by
Digitized by Goode
468
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
putting the steamer which was to mark the turning-point in the wrong place, managed that there should be no beating to windward (presumably the Britisher's strong point) either going or returning. There was also a misunderstanding about the way in which the turning-point should be rounded. It is the custom in American waters to leave all turning-marks on the starboard hand, and, as this had been done by both schooners when rounding the Sandy Hook lightship in the previous race, the captain of the Livonia never doubted that the same
THE STARTING-GUM, COWES.
course was to be followed. The wily owner of the Columbia, however, took occasion to consult with the Committee about this before starting, and was told he might round as he pleased. No such information was given to the Livonia.
Away the two yachts went, the Livonia leading. She led all the way to the outer mark, and then gybed, in order to leave it on her starboard hand. The Columbia, on the other hand, luffed up and stayed round the mark, and thus stole the lead, being hitherto almost two minutes behind. In the end, the Columbia reached home, the winner by three minutes. Mr. Ashbury protested, and asked that the race might be thrown out and another sailed in place of it; but the Committee refused. “ I was on board of the Columbia during this race,” says Captain Coffin, “ and I think that Mr. Ashbury’s request was a proper one. The Livonia had led the Columbia all the way to the outer mark, and, but for
Digitized by
Google
A DISPUTED RACE.
469
this misunderstanding, would have begun the return in the lead. It was a straight reach to the finish, and it was possible for her to have won. As the Committee was clearly at fault in not giving explicit directions as to how the
THE GEVSTJ.
Photo. Symatidi & Co., PtfliMWMi.
mark should be turned, and as they had given permission to one skipper to turn either way, and had not given the same permission to the other, and as it was evident that the captain of the Livonia—following the racing rule of England, which provides that all marks shall be left on the starboard hand unless other directions be given—had lost time, Mr. Ashbury's request was a reasonable one, and should have been granted.”
Digitized by
Google
470 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
The third race was sailed on Thursday, October 19th, over the Club course. The wind was fresh, and the committee had some difficulty in choosing a representative vessel among their four. They ended by nominating the Columbia for the third time. The Livonia led by six minutes over the greater part of the course, and on the return journey the Columbia damaged her steering gear and gave up, leaving the Livonia to finish alone. The fourth and fifth matches were sailed against the Sappho on October 21 st and 23rd, and in both cases the American won easily. The New York Yacht Club now claimed that they had won their four races. Mr. Ashbury demurred to this, continuing his protest against the mark-boat incident in the second race. The Committee sent no answer to his letter, and the Englishman sailed for home. At the first meeting of the New York Yacht Club in 1872 a letter was read from him in which he roundly charged the Club with unsportsmanlike conduct. The Club at once ordered that the cups he had left to be sailed for should be returned to him ; and with this his connection with American yachting came to an end. On the whole, we may say that the Livonia had small chance of bringing home the Cup in any case, but that the Americans contrived to minimise this chance by methods not altogether respectable.
Twice, in 1876 and again in 1881, Canada made a bid for the Cup, and unsuccessfully. In the second case a builder, a Captain Cuthbert, announced his intention of laying up his sloop, the Atalanta at New York, and renewing his challenge next season. To protect itself against this, the New York Yacht Club insisted upon a change in the deed of gift, and returned the Cup to Mr. George L. Schuyler, the only surviving donor; receiving it back from him with a clause which provided that a defeated yacht should not again be eligible as a challenger until two years had intervened from the time of the first contest.
But in the December of 1884 the Americans heard of more formidable foes It was said that the owners of the British cutters Gehesta and Galatea were about to challenge for the Cup. The record of Sir Richard Sutton’s Geneata was well known; and the newer Galatea, then being built more or less on her model, was presumably an even better boat Certainly the Americans had nothing fit to beat either, and their yachting men agreed that, if the Cup was to be retained, it must be by a yacht yet to be constructed. Mr. James Gordon Bennett and Mr. W. P, Douglas, the Commodore and Vice-Commodore of the New York Yacht Club, at once resolved to build a yacht about the size of the Genesta, and after long consideration they accepted the design of Mr. A. Cary Smith for an iron sloop, and gave the Harlan and Hollingsworth Company the contract to build her. Her name was to be the Priseilia.
But meanwhile plans for yachts to defend the Cup had been pouring into the New York Yacht Club at the rate of one or two a day. And, meanwhile, also several experienced yachtsmen had been putting their heads together, and after consulting with Mr. Edward Burgess, of Boston, had agreed on a design
Digitized by GOOQle
THE GEWSTA AND THE GALATEA. 471
for a centre-board yacht which should combine all that was best in the English and American models and rigs. On this compromise model, as it was called, Messrs. Lawley and Sons, of Boston, built the famous Puritan. The Priscilla turned out to be a fast boat; but in the trial races the Boston sloop beat her handsomely, and was consequently chosen to bo the Cup defender.
Sir Richard Sutton took the Genesta across in the summer of 1885; and the two races for the Cup were sailed on. September 14th and 16th. Not more than two were necessary, for the Puntan won both—the one by 16 min. 19 secs,, the other by 1 min. 38 secs. Nevertheless, the races proved the Genesta to be an extremely fast boat—fast enough to have beaten any other boat in America except the Puritan. Before leaving for England she won a thousand-dollar cup, ottered by Vice-Commodore Douglass, beating the American Grade by close on twenty-two minutes; and also started for tho Brenton’s Reef and Cape May Challenge Cups, both of which trophies she brought home.
Scarcely had Str Richard Sutton laid up his boat in winter quarters before Lieutenant Henn, the owner of the Galatea, challenged for the following year. The Galatea, though undoubtedly a beautiful boat, had hardly proved herself superior to the Genesta; and the Americans might well have argued that the Puritan was good enough for her after what she did for her sister. But that is not their way. Four boats were soon in the lists to defend the Cup, and each had her supporters—the trusty Puntan, with her laurels still fresh; the Priscilla, with every-defect altered, but with her victory still to win; the new Atlantic, which proved a disappointing boat; and the beautiful Mayflower, the prido of Boston, and the latest achievement of Boston's great designer, Mr. Edward Burgess.
The trial races proved beyond a doubt that the Mayflower was the queen of the “ big four," and to her fell tho task of doing battle for her country.
A new spirit seemed to have entered into the counsels of the New York Yacht Club. They conducted the arrangements for the contest in a thoroughly sportsmanlike manner, consulted Lieutenant Henn on every point, and made every concession that courtesy and fairness could dictate. Tho first of tho three races (if three became necessary) was to be sailed over the Club course; the second was to be a twenty-mile beat to windward from the Sandy Hook or Scotland lightship, according to the direction of the wind, with a run back. Should each boat win one of these races, the deciding course would be a triangular one; but it was not needed this year, and the bearings need not be given.
And here we cannot do better than append the brilliant description of this memorable contest written by an eye-witness, Mr. Charles E. Clay.*
• “American Yachts and Yachting.” By Captain R. F. Coffin, Charles E. Clay, and Others. Illustrated by Fred. S. Cozzcns.
Digitized byVrOOQlC
472	THE STOEY OF THE SEA.
The First Race, Tuesday, September 7th.
“The all eventful expeclata diet, so eagerly longed for by enthusiastic thousands, dawned with anything but a promise of fine weatberx or favouring gales. A dull, leaden curtain hung over the busy city. Flags drooped limp and motionless against their poles, and, with a heart full of misgiving, I awaited the arrival of the Stranger at the Twenty-third Street pier. Off in the stream lay the steam yacht Electra, while, darting backwards and forwards, her saucy little launch conveyed on board the guests of her owner, Elbridge T. Gerry, the Commodore of the New York Yacht Club.
“Soon, down the river from Mr. Jaffray’s country place on the Hudson, came the Stranger, not only one of the handsomest and largest steam yachts in the world, but certainly the fastest of its size. Our courtly host lost no time in welcoming us on board the launch ; we were speedily puffed out to the larger craft, and in a few minutes more good Captain Dand was heading the Stranger full steam down stream,
“‘To join the glad throng that went laughing along.’ '
“We did not lack for company; every conceivable craft was bound our way, from the leviathan excursion steamers, with decks massed black with people, to the tiny skiff, piloted by its solitary occupant. And now we are amid the flower of America’s floating palaces, and close beside us steams the A taianta. Beyond is the Corsair, with Lord Brassey aboard. Ahead, astern, and on every side are seen the gleaming hulls of beautiful yachts, the Ortwi, Orienta, Tillie, Puzzle, Radha, Magnolia, Vision, Speedwell, Ocean Gem, Theresa, Oneida, better known as the Utowana, Viking, Wanda, Naoya, Falcon, Electra, Vedette,
“ * Cum multi* alii* qua nunc prcecribere lougum e»L’
“The flyers of other days, too, are there, the Rambler, Columbia, Ambassadress, Tidal
BOYAL YACHT BUCADRON, CLUB HOVSE LAWN, 00WB8.
Digitized by GOOQle
GALATEA v. MAYFLOWER.
473
Wave, Montauk, Ruth, Priscilla, Dauntless, Carlotta, Fleetwing, Mischief, Republic, Wanderer, Wave Crest, Gaviota, and a host of their fair sisters whose names I could not get. And, darting hither and thither among the fleet, like some hissing, fiery snake, emitting from time to time the shrillest of piercing whistles, rushed the rakish-looking little steam launch Henrietta, Mr. Herreshoffs last production, said to go an average speed of twenty knots an hour.
win goto.
“ Anxiously we scanned the distant Narrows to see if there was any sign of a coming breeze, and, as if in answer to the silent ejaculations of the assembled multitude, a dark ripple was seen to ruffle the glassy surface of the bay, and gave promise of a breeze outside.
“ It was now ten o’clock, and the rivals were daintily picking their way in and out among the waiting armada, manceuvring to get a good start as the whistle bade them cross the line.
“At the warning scream the Mayflower stood bravely for the line, carrying her boom to port with club-topsail, staysail, and jib set, and breaking out her jib-topsail as she crossed. 0 I it was a beautiful sight, and made every pulse beat quicker, and sent the warm blood tingling through my veins. The British cutter was not a whit behind; 1 hauling to ’ very sharply, she rushed, with great headway, in between the sloop and the stake boat, and got the weather gauge, blanketing her antagonist, who bad to keep off a trifle in consequence.
“ This was a very smart and seamanlike manoeuvre, but, in my humble opinion, it was an error in judgment; for, had the cutter taken the leeward place, with her pace at the time, she could have stood the detriment of the blanketing for the short time they held the
Digitized by
Google
474
THE STOBY OF THE SEA.
starboard tack, and, when she went about, would have compelled the sloop to do the same, and so had the Mayflower under her lee for the long leg over to Staten Island.
“ However, the fact remains that, despite the Galatea's blanketing, the Boston sloop ran away from under the Englishman’s lee, and when the latter, owing to her deeper draught, went about off Bay Ridge, the Mayflower stood on for another thirty seconds and came about well to windward, and had the cutter where she wanted her, and where she kept her till she was a beaten boat.
“ Off Fort Wadsworth the two boats again tacked, the Mayflower at 11 :13: 30, and the cutter a minute later, and stood across to Fort Hamilton. Two things now quickly became apparent: that the Mayflower, though sailed a good rap full all the time, pointed just as high os the Galatea, which was evidently being sailed very fine, as shown by the continual lifting and shivering of her head sails, and that the saucy Yankee had the heels of her English rival, and was creeping ahead and to windward very fast At 11.22 the Mayflower went about again, and stood on a long reach into the Narrows to get the benefit of the slack water. Ten minutes later the Galatea tacked and stood towards the Staten Island shore, but the Mayflower had gone al»ut again, and stood towards the Englishman, whom she cut about 200 yards dead to windward. While the Galatea was on this tack, the St, John, the regular Long Branch steamer, had the bad taste to sail right across the Galatea’s bow, treating her to all her backwater. It was a churlish act, and showed a want of courtesy that no 1'eal ‘salt’ would have thought of being guilty of. At 11.35 the Mayflower went about off Gravesend Bay, and the Galatea followed suit at the same moment, a little to the south-east of buoy No. 15. In these repeated tackings, it was noticeable that the Galatea was the handier 1 in stays,’ the American craft appearing just a trifle sluggish. On entering the Narrows the breeze seems to be freshening up a little, and the Yankee boat bends gracefully over to it, and the white spray dancing round her bows shows that she is quickening her pace. The Galatea stands up straighter, and is slipping through the water without much fuss, but does not seem to he gaining much on her fleet-winged rival. Off buoy 13 the Mayflower went ‘in stays’ again at 11.411 and stood towards Coney Island Point, and six minutes later she was followed by the cutter. The sloop made but a short leg here, and at 11.50 she went about again, bringing both boats on the same tack, heading about east. The sloop seems to have doubled her vantage of 200 yards. They seem to be sailing the cutter a bit fuller now, but as we pass astern of her I notice that she has the weather jib-topsail sheet towing in the water. On this board the cutter appears to gain slightly on the sloop, and at half a minute before noon she goes about once more ; the Mayflower follows her lead at 12.03|, and goes round between buoys 9 and 11. The recital of tacks seems endless, but on each board the American boat increased her lead, and finally rounded buoy 8! at 1: 1 : 51, official time. The Galatea weathered the same buoy at 1:7:7. From here to buoy 5 the positions of the contestants did not vary much, and the Mai flatter led her antagonist by about six minutes, irrespective of the 38 seconds’ time allowance she had to give the cutter. The wind continues light, and the sea is as smooth as a tennis court. Rounding buoy 8i both boats can about lie the course to the lightship, which bears S.E by E. The breeze seems a good deal fresher outside, and the Mayflower is dancing gaily along, lying over to her plank-shear. How gloriously buoyant is her motion as she rises and falls to the gentle undulations which make up as we gain the open water I This is the longest reach of the day, and gives us all a breathing spell for refreshments.
‘‘At 2.28 the sloop comes ‘in stays,’ and takes in her jib-topsail as she stands towards the ugly-looking red hulk that shows the way into the channel. Her crew are busy getting her balloon jib-topsail run up ‘in stops,’ and soon a white streak, running from truck to bowsprit end, appears. The floating navy that has accompanied ns all the way are gathered thickly round the lightship, hovering like bees about a sugar barrel; and now, as the swiftly gliding sloop approaches the turning-point, their pent-up enthusiasm can be restrained no longer; first one and then another impatient tug and steamer emits her shrill scream of welcome, and then, all at once, it seems us if every demon from the nether world is let loose, roaring round the Mayflower. The toot-toot-tooting is simply ear-splitting. Cannon thunder forth their approbation from brazen throats; frantic crowds bellow themselves hoarse ; the very planks beneath my feet seem starting from the seams of the Stranger as her booming cannon, withheld by rigid discipline till the exact moment of rounding, belches forth her quota to the hurly-burly around us.
Digitized by GOOQle
SECOND RACE.
475
“ But see! it is scarce five seconds since the Mayflower turned her sharp prow to plough homewards, when lo I a white puff of snowy canvas bursts like the smoke from a distant battery, and, bellying to a spanking breeze, her balloon jib-topsail is sheeted home and envelops her from topmast head to end of her jibboom, and away aft to her full waist. Well and smartly handled, ye motley crew; you may not look so neat and natty as the uniformed lads of the Galatea, but the old Norse blood of your forefathers runs in your veins, and ye are no degenerate sons of Hengist and Horsa and the other vikings of your native land.
“ But Voe metis! Already the tardy cutter is almost forgotten as she struggles bravely on, irrevocably handicapped beyond redemption now, for the sloop is running while she has still a weary beat before she can do the same. At last she too tacks for the turning mark, but carries her baby jib-topsail to the very last minute, in the hope of gaining a yard or two thereby. She tacked at 2.40, and at 2.44 is fairly off after her rival. Now, toys, bear a hand ; up with your balloon ; you have not a moment to lose ; the breeze that favoured the Yankee is fast dying away, and you must make the most of it. Why, what’s the matter, ye hardy sons of Yarmouth ? Ah, there it goes up I—up I What! it's surely not foul 1 Yes ! down, down it has to come, and three weary minutes are consumed before it gets to the topmast head and begins to draw. The game is well-nigh over now. Aw-ay in the distance, like some huge albatross with outspread pinions, the Manpower is nearing buoy 8J, which she rounds at 3.34, and so round S.W. spit buoy 3| minutes later, and jibed her mainsail to get her spinnaker under way. But the wind hud hauled into the eastward, and the boom was left in slings ready to be dropped at a moment’s notice.
“ The Galatea rounds buoy Kj at 3.4GJ, and the S.W. spit buoy at 3.50. The wind freshens a trifle, and the cutter tries her spinnaker, and the Mayflower follows suit almost immediately. The goal is rapidly neared now : the same demoniac noises commence, but are kept up twice as long, and, if it were possible, are twice as loud. The very bosom of the mighty deep seems to tremble, and, amid salvos of cannon, the jubilee of 50,000 throats, and the ovation, congratulations, and rejoicings of such a multitude as had never before gathered on New York’s historic bay, the |ieerless Boston sloop Mayflower bore her happy owner, General Paine, over the line at 4.22|.
“I append the official time :—
		Stasi.	Finish .	Elapsed Tina.	Cobbected Time.
	n.	m. a.	H. M. s.	n. m. a.	h. m. a
Mayflower .	..	10	□6 12	4 22 53	5 26 41	5 26 41
Galatea ...	.	..	10	56 11	4 35 32	5 39 21	5 38 43
"Mayflower wins by 12 min. 2 sec."
The Second Race, September 9th.
“As I threaded my way to the bows of the members’ boat of the New York Yacht Club, on which Mr. Hurst, the Treasurer, had kindly secured me a passage, I felt that I was about to witness the same performance outside the Hook as had saddened my spirits on the first day.
“The weather was most unfavourable ; drizzling rain commenced before we left Pier No. 1, and continued, without intermission to speak of, throughout the entire day. Added to these discomforts, a dense fog settled down early in the afternoon and put an end to the race and to any enjoyment of the trip, and sent us home groping our way, and landed us late, hungry, and thoroughly miserable. In discussing this abortive attempt to finish this series of races I shall confine myself strictly to the details and technicalities of the contest, leaving the reader to supplement the accompaniments and accessories from my previous description, his vivid imagination, or the details to be gathered from the voluminous expressions of opinion in the daily press accounts. The wind had risen considerably by the time we reached the Scotland lightship, and the weather gave angry tokens of letting loose a regular sou’wester. It was manifestly a clinking ‘cutter day,’ and right merrily did the Galatea lads move smartly about, taking a reef in the running bobstay, running in her bowsprit, hauling down the big jib, and substituting the second-sized one. Lieutenant Henn did not mean to be caught napping.
Digitized by GOOQle
476	THE STORY OF THE SEA.
"No change was made on the Mayflower. She carried her big jib and gained a great advantage thereby. Both craft thought it best to carry only working topsails.
"At 11.20 the preparatory whistle was blown from the steam tug Lucienback^ while the Scandinavian had been started ahead to mark out a twenty-mile course east by north, dead in the teeth of a fresh breeze of wind that put the racing craft scuppers to and sent the black waves seething and boiling in their wake.
rAoiOi ft wendi £ Co., J’ortomoKtJU
THE VOZ L'.VT£^7L
"Almost immediately after the starting signal, the Mayflower bounded across the line, just skinning past the lightship. The Galatea was quite a good deal to leeward, and had to shake up a trifle into the wind to pass the judge’s boat Time of crossing was 11 :30: 30, and 11 : 30: 32. Both craft were being sailed a shade fine, but the Boston sloop evidently held her way better, while the cutter made more leeway than she ought.
“The Galatea did not relish her jwsition, and at 11.50 made her first tack, quickly followed by the sloop. It was at once apparent that the old game had commenced, and the Boston boat, like a giddy girl, was romping away from her more sedate English sister. The difference in set of the sails of the two boats was also very noticeable ; for, while the Mayflower's canvas was stretched flat as a board, the leech of the Galatea kept licking about
Digitized by
Google
THE MAYFLOWER WINS.
477
the whole way to windward, and must have been as annoying to her owner as it was disheartening to the gazing cutter men.
“At 12.20 Sandy Hook lightship was passed, and the sloop had a clear lead of half a mile. The Mayflower made another short board at 12.68, returning to her original tack at
Photo. Uyniomfa X Co., PurUmoulh. THE METEOR, LATE THISTLE.
1.11. The Englishman held straight on. The wind shows a tendency to lighten, and at 1.27 the Galatea sent down her working topsails, and replaced it smartly by her club-topsail.
“When about half the windward course was done the Mayflower appeared about Sj miles distant, dead to windward of the cutter. At 1.37 the sloop tacked, and while shaking 'in stays’ her crew very smartly sent aloft her club-topsail to windward of her working one. The Galatea tacked again at 1.39, and apparently got a better wind, and seemed to have closed up the gap somewhat At 1.50 the wind had lightened enough to allow the sloop to send up her jib-topsail. The sea also became smoother, and the fog began to settle down so thick that it was with difficulty the Galatea could be discerned a full three miles to leeward,
Digitized by
Google
478 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
which the sloop gradually widened to four or five before she rounded the mark buoy at 4 : 24 : 45 by my time. I saw nothing more of the Galatea, that day, but read that she bore up for home when the Mayflower rounded. Fog, light wind, and closing darkness put an end to the race, which counted for nothing, as it was not sailed in the seven-hour limit, but it proved to the most sceptical the marked superiority of the sloop at the very game that was fondly believed to be par excellence a cutter’s, for the Mayflower gained almost all her vantage while the sea and wind held. She outwinded and outspeeded the English cutter, and did not make nearly the leeway the Galatea did.”
A third race had yet to be sailed: and it was sailed on Saturday, September 11th—a sunny day, with a fresh, steady breeze. It is unnecessary’ to go into the details of this race, which, indeed, was more or less a repetition of the two previous struggles. Again the Mayflower left the Galatea behind in the run to leeward, and increased her lead in thrashing back to windward. She won this, the deciding event, by 29 min. 9 secs.
But the Americans were not suffered to rest long upon their laurels. The next season brought another challenge. Scotland was not disheartened by England’s successive defeats, and a syndicate of Scottish yachtsmen entrusted Mr. G. L. Watson with the task of pitting his ingenuity against that of the great American, Burgess, Mr. Watson produced an improvement on the old cutter type, cutting away the length of the water-line both fore and aft, and gave us the Thistle (now the Meteor, owned by the German Emperor). Mr. Burgess retorted with tho Volunteer, and tho international races were sailed that year on Tuesday and Friday, September 27th and 30th.
Tuesday, the 27 th, dawned unpropitiously. The water -was oily, and scarcely a breath of wind broke the autumn haze. Amid a crowd of steamers the two yachts hung idly, with all their canvas hanging limp. The tide was at the ebb, and, to prevent drifting over the line, each of the rivals had been forced to drop anchor. The hour for the start went by, the tide turned, and matters looked hopeless, when a gentle breath camo up from the south and gradually grew stronger. At once all was bustle and enthusiasm. The pleasure craft were warned away from the line, and the police-boat steamed about driving back the small fry to give the rivals sea-room; and here again we must quote Mr. Clay:—
“ Thistle's sails filled ; her small hook came on deck in short order; she gathered headway and went skimming about apparently regardless of any danger to hull and sjiars, in and out among the raft of pleasure craft. Every eye was upon her, and she certainly was a worthy object. A more beautiful boat and rig was never seen on "New York Bay. Mainsail, club-topsail, foresail, jib, and jib-topsail were set and sheeted down Hat. The speed developed in the light wind seemed to all observers marvellous, and the ease with which the cutter was handled at once became the universal topic of conversation, working, as she did. back and forth and round about the great fleet of boats jammed so close together that it did not seem possible for anything under sail to work through them—yet Thistle did it.
“ Volunteer worked her way within the crescent of boats above the line, and moved in a very slow and- deliberate manner. Iler main sheet was cleutcd down short, bringing the boom almost over the wheel. In manoeuvring for position, now tacking, now jibing, she was in anything but a hurry, while the Thistle flitted about and seemed able to sail round and round her. Then the American heart sank. The race was over—so it appeared to many—and. Volunteer beaten before the start. The betting men who had staked odds on
Digitized by LnOOQle
THISTLE r. VOLUNTEER.
479
Volunteer actually tried to hedge. Some of them succeeded, much to their disgust later in the day.
“The ten minute warning gun was fired from Electra'* deck at 12.20. The excitement on board every boat of that tremendous fleet was intense. The supreme moment had arrived. The great race was to begin. The two crack yachts were to test their relative merits. One of them had beaten everything in English waters, was the best work of a most skilful designer, who had always lived where the finest ships of the world are built. In the shape of money and care nothing had been omitted that could in any way conduce to the speed of the yacht. She had been sailed across the Atlantic expressly to race for the Cup. Her large crew were picked men, thoroughly understanding the work they had to do, and were accustomed to work together. Her captain last year won in this country eleven first prizes— in eleven races—in the cutter yacht Clara, and was therefore familiar with the winds and waters of the New York Yacht Club course. Thistle was by far the finest yacht that ever came here to sail for the Cup, and it seemed to everyone that her chances of winning were far better than those of other yachts that have in former years sailed for it.
“ Volunteer is owned by General Paine, who had the Puritan built to sail against Genesta, and the Mayflower that held the Cup out of the reach of Lieutenant Henn and his Galatea last year. All three yachts were designed by Burgess, of Boston, and each one in turn hud beaten everything built before it. Volunteer had scored as many victories over American yachts as Thistle had over English yachts when they both sailed over the line that eventful September day. Honours were easy thus far at any rate. Which was it to be in the greatest race of all—of the world ? Thistle ! So the majority thought as she headed for the eastern (windward) end of the starting line ns Electra's gun boomed at 12.30, leaving Volunteer jibing round under her stern. Thistle crossed the line at 12:33:06, her sails trimmed flat aft and drawing beautifully, amid the most awful chaos of sound any sane man ever heard. For once a British yacht led his Yankee rival at the line in an international cup race, and every steam whistle on the bay recognised the fact by a long howl.
“But Volunteer was not very far behind. Had Captain Huff eased off the main sheet? Something had been done, surely, for as she came on the wind after her jibe and headed for the line, making close up for the buoy, the sloop moved as she had not done before that day. She meant business, now that the race had begun, whatever she bad been up to before the starting signal was given. On she came, crossing the line nt 12: 34: 58, a minute and 52 seconds behind Thistle. Both yachts were on the port tack making for the Narrows. The fleet began to move. Electra ran in her cable and steamed after the racers.
“All eyes are fixed on the club-topsails of the two yachts—about all that could be seen of them from the Electra’s deck above the compact mass of boats directly in their wake.
*“ Thistle's about !’ someone calls out J ‘what will Volunteer do?’
“The sensible thing, of course ! She keeps right on toward the Staten Island shore, from whence the wind comes. Captain Barr sees his mistake, for the wind is failing him, and in two minutes comes about on port tack again.
“Will Volunteer cross to windward of Thistle when she comes about later on? That is the question now. She will have the right of way in any event.
“ Volunteer does conic about a little later on, and, sure enough, she will cross the Thistle’s bow—she does it, and another howl goes up from the metal throats of the steamers.
‘“How did it happen?’ ‘What is the matter with Captain Barr?1 ‘Why don’t Thistle move? She seemed to be doing well but a moment ago.' Yes, but she lost the wind for a moment and Volunteer held it. ‘Is Captain Barr pinching her up too close?1 a yachtsman asks, as the head sails are seen to shake, then fill, and a moment later shake again. It would seem so. Volunteer is being sailer! to perfection, and Thistle—well, it is difficult for anyone not on her to criticise intelligently. But it does not seem that she is doing her best, from what we have been led to cx|>ect. Volunteer keeps moving, and works down through the Narrows into the open bay beyond, where there is more wind. She is ahead of the great fleet of steamers. Thistle is becalmed, gets a breeze and works ahead a little, only to be left again by the fickle wind. The fleet presses her close, and hedges in on both sides, those behind forcing those in front ahead and to the sides. All want to see. All want to get through and follow the leader. There is no room. Fort Lafayette and Fort Wadsworth are but little over a mile apart, and the Thistle must have room to move
Digitized by Goode
480
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
between them. The steamers hug the shore closely and press through, putting on full steam and kicking up a fuss as soon as they clear the forts in their efforts to rush up on Volunteer, now a mile ahead.
“It was a grand sight, that passage of the Narrows, The shores on both sides were black in great spots with people, carriages lined the drives of Fort Hamilton, and crowds were on the green slopes of Fort Wadsworth. Between them was a mass of puffing, rolling, gliding, sailing marine monsters, and, in the centre of all, an innocent little whitewinged cutter that was elbowed here and pushed there, so it seemed to the looker-on. Away off down the lower bay was another innocent—a white-winged sloop, apparently having no liking for such a crowd, and doing her best to leave the mob behind her— and succeeding,	.
“ The course is about the shape of the letter L, the perpendicular side of which bends back a little, and the horizontal part, just beyond the angle, has a slight jog in it. The top of the letter is the starting line at Buoy 18 in the upper bay; the angle is Buoy 10 at Southwest Spit, the slight jog above mentioned is made by Sandy Hook, and the outer end of the better is marked by the lightship. The finish line is at Buoy 15 outside the Narrows, so that the yachts on their
DIAGRAM OF A CEX TUB SOAK I).
a, Centreboard rained ; b. Centreboard lowered.
return do not have to go quite to the top of the L. The course is thirty-nine miles,
“It was a long beat to windward from the starting line to Buoy 10, with long port tacks and a short starboard leg now and then to keep the yachts in the channel between the buoys. Volunteer gained steadily, and the fleet of steamers kept well behind her. After passing the Narrows the Thistle was bothered but little by the boats, as the lower bay gave them plenty of room to allow the cutter a wide berth.
“ Volunteer must have been about two miles ahead of Thistle when she
rounded the Spit Buoy and eased sheet a little to clear the point of the Hook. Before Thistle rounded the buoy, Volunteer had greatly increased the lead in distance (if not in time). Volunteer laid a true course from the point of the Hook to the lightship, and moved at a good speed, although the wind was still light, and water quite smooth—adding much to the comfort of the thousands of landsmen on the excursion boats, A large cloth with the words ‘Keep astern' painted on it was hung over the side of Volunteer whenever the impertinent tugs and barges approached too near.
“ Volunteer luffed round the lightship at 3 :07 : 13f, leaving it on the starboard hand, and began the reach in without adding an inch of cloth to the sail spread, although the wind was abaft the beam. A ba Hoon-jib-topsail would have materially increased the speed. Thistle could then lie seen with difficulty, on account of the slight haze, way off in the direction of the Hook, having a slight angle of heel, and her sails and masts looking like a tall thin reed against tho dark cloud background.
“A few of the smaller fry followed Volunteer, but the larger steamers waited to give Thistle a salute when she rounded the outer mark. Electra lay to for a time, and then steamed for home before the Thistle came up, as the Regatta Committee wished to run no chances of being behind Volunteer at the finish,
“As Volunteer passed the Thistle, the one going west, the other east, she shook out of stops her large jib-topsail as a salute, perhaps, and let the smaller one (that hud been up all day thus far) come down with a run.
“Thistle rounded the lightship at 3 : 28: 12 (20 minutes and 58 seconds behind Volunteer), cracked on every foot of sail that would draw, and bowled for home unhampered by steamers.
“The sloop was greatly bothered and blanketed by the excursion boats on the run back
Digitized by
Google
YACHTING—AF ran SOON TEA.
31
Digitized by LnOOQle
482
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
—quite as much so, in fact, os the cutter had been earlier in the day. As Volunteer jibed round the Spit Buoy and was off on the home stretch, her spinnaker was set to starboard and earned to the finish line.
“The Electra took a short cut in through the Swash Channel and came to anchor near Buoy 15, thus marking the finish line. Yachts, sailboats, rowboats, canoes, tugs, barges, steamers, and almost every kind of craft that floats, hovered round, and formed a long lane down which the racing yachts must pass to cross the line. Every minute added to their numbers. The grassy slojass of Fort Wadsworth just beyond on the Staten Island shore were thronged with people, and even Fort Hamilton across the bay had a goodly number on its earthworks and roadway, as the glass showed.
“A compact mass of boats was seen coining up the bay, and the club topsail of Volunteer could be picked out nearly all the time, sticking above everything else, the only part of her that could be seen. On she came, showing more and more of her beautiful siiajie as the boats divided to let her enter the narrow lane leading to victory. Then sho crossed the line a winner. The scene at the finish had better be left to the imagination. No description would do justice to it.”
On Thursday the weather was dead calm, and the second race had to be postponed until next morning, when a start was made shortly after half-past 10 the wind at that time blowing prettily steadily from RN.E.
“At 10.30 the preparatory signal was fired from the flagship, mid the two yachts began manoeuvring for the windward berth. Both were a little to tire southward of us, running easily away with slackened sheets until the Thistle judged it time to come towards the line, when she wore round, and, gathering in her main sheets, came towards the Electra's 'midships, increasing her pace as her sails were allowed to take the full pressure of the breeze, till it seemed as if she intended driving her long bowsprit right through the iron sides of the flagship. But no ; Scotia’s bravest sailor is handling the long and slender tiller, and at the exact moment he swings it smartly to windward, and the Thistle pays off handsomely, burying her sharp prow deep into the curling waves as she rushes madly past our stern. Down went the tiller again, and the trim beauty turned sharply on her heel with all the grace and witchery of a lovely dauseuse, and shaving the Electra’s fwrt side so closely that I could easily have tossed a biscuit on her gleaming side, and sheeting aft her heavy boom with lightning rapidity, she careened gently to the freshening wind, and clashed across the Jine amid the deafening roar and in the very smoke of the starting gun. A grander piece of bolder seamanship was never witnessed, and for accuracy of timing and excellence of nerve and judgment could not be equalled. During this time the Volunteer had not been idle ; following closely on the heels of her antagonist, she approached the windward stakeboat a trifle farther from the southward and eastward, and coming up grandly under the starboard counter of the Electra, she put down her helm and luffed sharply by our port quarter, lying over until one could almost see her garboards out of the water, as the men sheeted home. Flashing past our bow like a gleaming meteor, Captain Haff again luffed her right into the wind with all her canvas shivering; but with the tremendous headway she hud, the gallant sloop ranged bravely ahead, so that when the helm was again put up and the sails were allowed to fill, the Volunteer lay to windward of the cutter u good twenty lengths.
“ The excitement for the first five minutes was intense, the anxiety supreme, the enthusiasm boundless ; and then came the beginning of the end—the sorrowful conviction that, barring accidents, the Thistle was a beaten boat. From the widening distance which each moment separated the two boats, two things became quickly manifest, and those were : that the Volunteer pointed higher in the wind, and, at the same time, outfooted the Thistle. Watching the rivals as they sped swiftly on their first tack, one could not help contrasting each slight difference in their movement —the set and working of their sails, the angle of heel, and many minor details. In the first place, there could be little doubt that the cutter stood up better to her canvas than the sloop ; but, os I said before, she did not
Digitized by Google
THE VOLUNTEER WIN’S.
483
sail so close to the wind. Not that Captain Barr did not keep her as near as he could without pinching lier too much, as was the undoubted error in sailing the Galatea last year; but the Volunteer, with everything drawing rap taut, headed fully three-quarters of a point better to windward, and, what was better still, held the course that she pointed ; while the Thistle did not seem to be able to hold her pointed course, but continually kept falling to leeward of it. This failure, I think, is to be greatly attributed to the remarkable forefoot that Mr, Watson—for reasons best known to himself—had designed for the cutter which, being very much cut away, allowed the Thistle's head to be continually paying off, while her deep keel at the stern acted as a solid pivot on which to perforin this very undesirable feat Another undesirable feature in the Thistle—and attributable, also, to the same cutaway forefoot—was her tendency to bury her nose whenever she received any increased pressure of wind; and I am of the opinion that she would be apt to do this much more in strong winds, With such an immense weight of spars, one would naturally look for a good peqiendicular forefoot for her to stand up on, and I am not at all certain that her increased quickness ‘ in stays,’ which so peculiar a forefoot gives the Thistle, is equivalent to what she loses in the more essential quality of holding her way to windward. The sails of the Thistle, too. did not set so flat and symmetrically as did those of her rival. Particularly was this so with the foresail, which really did not seem to be of much use at all, so badly did it shake and flap all the way to windward. The after-leech of the mainsail flapped more than was to be wished, though this might have arisen from not having the maitiboom so closely sheeted aft as it was on board the Volunteer, and so gave the boom more play from the action of the wave motion ; however, this slight defect was more unsightly than detrimental to her progress. The Volunteer s sails seemed to fit fairly well, and were stretched flat as a board ; but I think that, on the whole, the Miiijflower's canvas last year was more satisfactory all round, but some allowance must be made for both boats in view of the canvas being soaked by two days’ hard rain.
“ Thus the two antagonists sailed along, the only perceptible difference being the widening of the Volunteer’s berth to windward—for, looking at them from directly astern, their speed through the water seemed about equal. Both boats held on the inshore tack for tho first hour, and at 11.45 were abreast of the big hotel at Rockaway Beach. About mid-day the sun made a dismal effort to join the great crowd of spectators, and for a brief interval smiled upon the occasion ; but he soon got tired of the monotony of the thing and retired for the rest of the day, leaving the mist, the fog, and the rain to take turns at doing pretty much as they pleased.
14 The Thistle was the first to go about at 11.49, followed two minutes later by the sloop. Both yachts now headed the sea, but there was really so very trifling resistance from this source that neither was in any way incommoded by it, though I thought that the Volunteer appeared to be more cork-like and buoyant as she glided silently and swiftly over the waves. The Thistle, by reason of her perfect bow above the load waterline, with its sharp entrance, made no fuss os she sped onward, but she gave me the idea that she had to cut her way through the water—that is to say, it looked as if more propelling force was required to drive the cutter at a fixed speed than was necessary for the sloop. While on this tack a very ominous-looking black cloud gathered angrily to windward and threatened an increase of wind, which, in fact, there was, ns the rain burst over us : but as that died away, so did the wind resume its ordinary velocity’. When the first tack was made, the fleet of accompanying steamers and tugs did not change their course sufficiently to give the contestants the same clear sea-room as they had at the outset, and began crowding the Thistle somewhat too closely—at least, so it seemed to us on the Electra—but the vigilant supervision of Commodore Gerry soon called them clear by the vigorous use of his shrill whistle, and a perfectly unobstructed course was maintained for the rest of the race.
“At 12.48 the Volunteer tacked inshore to starboard once more, and three minutes after the Thistle followed her lead, being then, as nearly as I could judge, about three-quarters of a mile dead to leeward. When the yachts got off Long Beach, shortly after one o’clock, the Volunteer had considerably increased her lead, and a full mile divided the pair. Soon after passing Long Beach, the sloop sent aloft her club topsail, and the Thistle took the hint and did the same. At 1.37 the sloop once more went about, the cutter doing likewise at 1,41. Both boats stood on this tack for a good half-hour, when each came about and assumed the starboard tack again.
Digitized by LnOOQle
484
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
“ The flagship now gave the contending boats the go-by, and took up a position commanding a splendid sight of the mark-boat to be rounded. The Volunteer was soon up with us once more, and moving magnificently through the water. She tacked once more about off the mark, and then rounded, easing her sheets to starboard. We then saw that
she did not have her spinnaker boom in slings on the right side, but was carrying it fore end aft on the port side. Her crew soon got the boom properly rigged, and seven minutes after rounding the huge sail was sheeted home and dragging like a dray-horse. The Thistlelt last board brought her a short distance to leeward of the mark, but a last little leg soon put her in a position to round, and, as she did so, she smartly dropped her spinnaker boom to port as she started mainsheets to starboard, and two minutes after every stitch was full and drawing splendidly. It was very prettily done, and showed plainly that the lads had not lost heart, though they were a couple of miles astern.
/•ftota ^vmondt i Co., Portemouti the Valkyrie.
most uneventful, no material difference in the relative position of the contending boats being perceptible, though it afterwards turned out, on taking the time at the finish, that the Thistle had gained a couple of minutes or so before the wind. A few minutes before three the Volunt.. r lowered her small topsail and set her balloon jib-topsail. The cutter behind followed .-nit immediately. In the next hour the wind jumped more to the southward ; the Thistle, being the first to feel the change, took in her spinnaker, and the Volunteer did the
same.
“ We were now close to the end of the race, and the Electra steamed ahead and anchored
once more abreast of the lightship. Then, amid the usual tooting of a hundred whistles, salvos of mimic artillery, and the jubilant exultations of thousands, the Volunteer crossed the line triumphant, and the coveted Cup belongs
once more . to America.
Digitized by ^OOQlC
YACHTING IN 1892.
485
“ The official time was ;—
Stabt. h. n. a Volunteer... ... 10 40 50| Thistle ............. 10	40 31
Feobh. h. m, a
4 23 47
4 35 12
and the Volunteer wins by 11 minutes 48J seconds”
For some time after this great struggle intern tional yachting languished, and was not until the autumn of 1892 that the enthusiasm broke out again. It was then that Mr. R I*. Carroll laid the keel of the Nav-hoe at Bristol, Rhode Island, with the express! intention of taking her to Eng-1 an d and bringing back the cups which Englishmen had won from America. Early in December, on the other side, the Earl of Dunraven challenge d for the
Tike Elapsed.
h. Jr. a
5 42 56}
5 54 51
COBBBCTBD TdCB h. it a 5 42 56} 5 64 45
I'kotc. ^nionda rft Co., Pc^tsbriDi. THE VIGILANT.

Am eric a’8 Cup itself, and almost at
once the building of swift yachts was begun in England and America. England supplied the Valkyrie, Britannia, Satanita, and Calluna;
the Valkyrie to race for the Cup, and the other three to test her, as well as to defend the reputation of British yachting against the attack of the Navahoe.
Digitized by
486
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
America replied with the Colonia, Vigilant, Jubilee, and Pilgrim, among whom she had to choose the Cup-defender.
The Navahoe, being built partly as a cruiser, performed but indifferently in British waters, and the Valkyrie, after proving very much more than her match, sailed from England with good hopes of beating any American boat on the other side of the water. She had a nasty passage of thirty days. Day after day the Americans had been expecting her, but no news came, and the anxiety was general when, one morning at sunrise, she appeared off Sandy Hook.
The Cup-defender had been already chosen. The Pilgrim had disappointed expectation, the Colonia had proved herself inferior in windward work, and the Jubilee, though very fast, was rigged with untrustworthy material. There remained the white centre-boarder Vigilant, the broadest of all in the beam and the deepest of all in draught, drawing, with her centre-board down, almost 24 feet. She was plated with bronze, and her centre-board (also of bronze) weighed 7,750 lbs. She had well beaten the others in fresh winds—that is to say, in weather which was supposed to suit the Valkyrie best—and had done well in light breezes; and, on the whole, there is no doubt that the choice was a very wise one.
Although her rough passage across the Atlantic had done the Valkyrie no good, she was quickly put into racing trim, and her beautiful lines at first caused some dismay among the Yankees. They stuck, however, to their preference for the centre-board sloop over the English deep keel and cutterrig, and the betting until the last ran in favour of their own boat
The races were fixed for October 5th, 7th, 9th, 11th, and 13th ; three races to be sailed on a course parallel with the wind, and two to be triangular. Each course was of thirty miles, and each must be sailed within
a limit of six On the 5th see a race had “ is one of the
hours. .
the crowd in the bay was enormous; but those who came to not reckoned with the weather. “ October,” says Mr. Herreshoff, worst periods of the whole year for racing, at least during the
first half of the month; the winds then are light and in constant force and direction, and calms are of a longer duration than at any period during the yachting season." The weather on this particular occasion was of the worst— flukes of light wind varied by calms. The preparatory gun was fired at 11.15 a.m,, tho starting gun ten minutes later. The rivals had been manoeuvring about with mainsails and jackyarders set, and were easily to be distinguished, the Vigilant being painted white, the Valkyrie black with a gilt line. The former, though she had to allow the Valkyrie but 1 min. 48 secs, over the whole course of thirty miles, looked considerably the bigger boat, and carried an enormous crew, the greater number of whom could have been of no earthly use in working her, and were probably introduced merely as living ballast, a dodge not provided for in the racing rules. Just before the start the yachts set their headsails. Vigilant hoisted a large bowsprit
Digitized by Google
rALKFMS v. VIGILANT.
487
spinnaker, and Valkyrie her large jib-topsail. As the starting gun fired the two boats went over the line close together with the wind astern, and at once put out their spinnakers on the starboard side ; but it was little breeze that they caught and little progress that they made. At half-past one, however, the breeze took a slant from S.W., and they soon had to take spinnakers in and haul close. The Vigilant was too quick in hauling up, and the Valkyrie, holding on a little longer, ran up to windward of her, took the wind out of her sails so completely that she stood stock-still for about ten minutes, and herself ran gaily on ahead. The Valkyrie reached and rounded the markboat twenty-five minutes ahead of the American. But the race was not to be hers; for the wind fell lighter and lighter, and it became clear that the course would never be finished within the time limit, and at 5.10 the Committee stopped the race.
It was clear that this day had been no test of the merits of the two boats. On tho 7th the morning was again dispiriting—faint westerly wind, a bright sky, and a gentle swell heaving from the southward. The Valkyrie, beautifully handled, slipped over the line ten seconds ahead, and the two went off under big sails, the Vigilant slowly gaining. About half-way to the mark she drew ahead; at 12.25 she led by a quarter of a mile, and at 1.30 by nearly a mile. A flow of wind then helped the Englishman up a little, but the Vigilant again drew ahead, and turned the mark nearly a mile and a half in front. Thence it was a plain sail homo, and the two boats crossed tho line thus :—
u. M. s. |	h. m. s.
Vigilant ........... 3 30 16	1 Valkyrie ............. 3 37 57
so that, deducting time allowance, the American won by 5 mins. 53 secs. Again the race had been more or less a matter of flukes. But on October 9th everything looked well. The weather was bright, with a fine topsail breeze. The course was triangular, ten miles each side, the first leg being to windward. After some pretty manoeuvring the yachts went over the line close together, the Valkyrie in the weather berth, and perhaps a trifle ahead. At first she seemed to lead—that is, she certainly went away from the American. But the latter was really sailing close, in order to get a good weather position; and as soon as her skipper found that tho moment had come for sailing her a bit freer, she quickly drew up and left the English boat astern, and had a good lead around the first mark. The next was a broad reach, and in the freshening wind both boats flew; but the Vigilant more than held her own, and still further lengthened her lead in the last reach, finishing a winner by ten minutes thirty-two seconds. " The race,” says Mr. Herreshofl', ” was a fine one, but it seemed to seal the fate of the Valkyrie; still with native pluck her undaunted owner made ready for the next race. By a most masterful stroke a new mainsail was bent, and more lead given the cutter, so that she lost fifteen seconds of time allowance from the American. The fourth race was another
Digitized by GOOQle
488
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
disappointment, faint breezes and intervals of calm baffled both yachts; the race could not be finished within the six hours; and tugs had to be sent out to tow the rivals in.
The fifth and the great race was sailed on October 13th. On the previous day a hard blow was reported as working up the coast, and the general impression was that the Vigilant, in a strong wind and rough sea, would win easily. At noon on the 13th, as the boats were getting ready for the start, the wind had set in strong and steady from the east, the sea was roughened, and the sky overcast. The preparatory gun was fired at 12.17, and the pair, each under the same canvas (jib-header over single-reefed mainsail, foresail, and jib), began some pretty fencing for the weather berth Valkyrie, as usual, won at this game, shot over the line ten seconds after the starting gun, the Vigilant following three seconds later. Throughout the long beat to windward Valkyrie behaved splendidly, kept her weather berth easily, and reached the outer mark two minutes ahead. Now came the run home. Spinnakers were set on both. The wind was rising rapidly, and the sea had become very rough; but each yacht had to put on all the canvas she could carry. Vigilant, knowing that she must work now if she meant to win, shook out the reef in her mainsail and set her No. 1 club topsail over it Valkyrie hoisted her biggest balloon jib-topsaiL For both boats it was a wild rush through the now heavy seas, and on both it seemed at every minute that the rigging must give way to the strain. Vigilant now gained on the Englishman, and drew level with her when about half-way home. Unhappily at this moment the Valkyrie’s great white spinnaker split. It was taken in with admirable smartness, and a second but smaller one set in its place; but this, too, split clean in two before it could be belayed, and the Valkyrie's chance was gone. The last three miles were clean gain for the Vigilant, and she crossed the line a close vanner on corrected time by forty seconds only. These were the times at the finish :—
H. M. B. |	H. M. 3.
Vigilant .......... 3 51 39	| Valkyrie ........... 3 53 52
Of the later fortunes of the two boats we have spoken in the preceding chapter. We may be sure that English yachtsmen will not know when they are beaten, and that if the Cup should never return to us it will not be for lack of trying.
Digitized by
Google
CHAPTER XX.
SEA LIGHTS AND SIGNALS.
A Brilliant Idea—A Gas-lit Street across the Atlantic—Old Methods of Lighting—Coal Fires—Objections to them—Oil Lamps—The “ Catoptric ” and •* Dioptric ” Systems—Coloured Lights—Cape Gris-nez Light—Needles Light—Ballycottin Light—StornowayLight—Defects of the Electric Light—French Lighthouse System—Management of Lighthouses—Life in a Lighthouse—Pay—Lightahi pa—Their Appearance and Construction—“Bombardment” of Sea Lights—The Birds and the Galloper Lightship—Fog Signals—Bells, Gongs, Whistles, Guns—Gun-cotton Rockets—The Syren—Buoys—How Painted—Bell Buoys, Whistling Buoys, and Gas Buoys,
AN ingenious Frenchman, M. Eugene Pere ire, once had a brilliant idea. / v The Atlantic clippers of former times had, so to speak, no fixed path, still less a straight one, between England and America. They had to turn aside to profit by the trade winds and ocean currents. Often they were blown completely out of their course by a succession of gales. But in these days of gigantic liners the case is quite different The powerful screw drives them
“ AN IMMENSE STREET ” (p. 490).
Digitized by v 7000 Ie
490
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
straight to their destination, regardless of wind and wave, and the track across the ocean is almost as definite as a high road. In the line of it you will meet vessel after vessel, while a mile or two to north or south you will find nothing but desolation. .
This being so, M. Pereire hit on the notion of placing lights at short distances along the whole route between Europe and America, so that the path of the great steamships would resemble an immense street or boulevard, from the lights of which they would never wander. He proposed to construct a number of floating lighthouses, each shaped like a gigantic iron bottle, and containing a staircase, a dwelling-room, and a light-chamber. These iron bottles were to be towed out to their destination, and there moored by strong chains to huge blocks of cast-iron resting on the bottom of the sea. They would be kept upright by the simple method of letting a quantity of water into the base, which would make them stand up in the waves as an ordinary wine-bottle will float when partly full. These lighthouses would be connected by electricity with the great transatlantic cables, and one or two light-keepers would be stationed in each.
A similar, but slightly less ambitious, scheme was proposed by another Frenchman, M. Felix Laurent. ‘His notion was to fix at intervals along the great route large iron buoys containing compressed gas to feed a large gasburner which they carried on top. One or more vessels would bo charged with a special duty of visiting these buoys and renewing the supply of gas— no very troublesome work, since gas enough could be stored in each of them to supply a light burning constantly for two or three months.
These magnificent schemes would no doubt reduce the danger of crossing the Atlantic to a minimum, besides enabling us to inform ourselves from day to day, and even from hour to hour, of the movements of a vessel containing our friends or our fortunes. It is improbable, of course, that they will lie realised in this generation; but no one will call them ridiculous who has studied the great progress made in our methods of coast-lighting during this century. We have said something in a previous chapter of such triumphs of engineering as the Skerryvore, Eddystone, and Bishop Rock Lighthouses; but the skill which placed these buildings securely upon wave-swept rocks in midsea is scarcely more wonderful than the ingenuity spent in improving the lights they exhibit. For forty years after Smeaton completed his Eddystone tower it was illuminated by tallow candles stuck in hoops, just as a booth is lighted at a country fair; and as late as 1811 it was lit with twenty-four wax candles, five of which weighed 2 lbs. In 1812 the Lizard light was maintained with coal fires; and in 1816, when the Isle of May light, in the Frith of Forth, was taken over by the Commissioners of the Northern Lighthouses, a coal fire was exhibited in a chauffer—a description of light which had been exhibited for 181 years. Indeed, until the close of the last century very little improvement had been made on the methods of the ancient Greeks,
Digitized by Goode
OLD METHODS OF LIGHTING.
491
Romans, and Egyptians, who seem to have illuminated their coast-beacons either with an open wood or coal tire or by burning torches dipped in tar.
In 1701, for instance, Harwich had two lighthouses—the greater one above the town gate burning a sea-coal fire, the lesser one upon the town-green showing six tallow candles. By the year 1801 the only improvement mado was the addition of a tint piece of rough brass on the landward side, to serve as a reflector.
The North Foreland lighthouse, again, was originally only a big glass lantern
stuck on tho top of an ordinary timbered house. This was burnt down in 1683; and an octagon tower was erected in its place, with a large iron grate on top, to hold a coal fire.
In wet or dirty weather there was much difficulty in keeping this fire alight; so in 1732 it was covered in with a glass lantern, and the coal firo kept burning by means of bellows, which the lightkeepers were constantly blowing. It was soon found, however, that the lantern interrupted some of the light, and prevented the glare of the fire in the sky, which was thought to be useful; so it was taken off again, and the open coal fire was used till 1790, when the tower was raised to its present height and tho coal fire done away with.
FIRST ORDER 8-BIDED REVOLVING LICHT (LOWESTOFT HIGH LIGHT), DATE 1873.
(Photo, by Menn. Chance Brothen, Engineer*, SswMicict, iw«r Din&lngkauC)
These coal fires were very unsatisfactory. If a strong wind blew
from seaward—which was just the time when the light would be most needed, os the wind was then making a lec-shore under the lighthouse—the iron bars of the grate on the inland side would bo almost melting with the heat of the fire, while the coals on the seaward side were quite black and unburnt, and showed no light at all out to sea. Moreover the light was always deficient in power, and the mariner had no means of distinguishing one from another—a very important point. Yet, as we see, they lasted until comparatively modern times. The Flat Holme light, in the Bristol Channel, burnt a coal fire as late as 1820.
But, about the end of the last century, vegetable and animal oil began to supersede both coal and candles; and in spite of the introduction of the electric light,
Digitized by
Google
492
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
by far the greatest number of lighthouses are now lighted with oil lamps, the oil in most favour being that obtained from a mineral source, as petroleum.
There are two principal means used for increasing the brilliancy of lamps in lighthouses. One is called the “ Catoptric” system, the other the “Dioptric.”
BIFORM 11YPERU ADI AL	SINGLE FLASHING LIGHT.
HOUND ISLAND, RCILLY, 1888.
(/’Aoto, by Ifewrj. CAa„« Brother*, Engineers) Smethwick, near Birmingham.)
It is important to distinguish these.
The catoptric system is a system of reflectors. When a candle or a lamp is lit, it gives out rays of light in straight lines in all directions; and it is clear that in the case of a single lamp the mariner will derive benefit only from that small ray which proceeds straight from the centre of the flame to his eye. The other rays will run to other parts of the horizon, or escape upwards to the sky, or downwards to the earth, and thus be of no value to him. Now, if a reflector of a certain curve be placed behind the lamp, it will collect these various rays and throw them all in one direction; so that, instead of wandering where they are not wanted, the rays will be reflected in the one direction where they will be most useful.
The dioptric system, for which we are indebted to the illustrious French physicist and mathematician, Augustin Fresnel, is, on the other hand, a
system of lenses. It consists of a central and powerful lamp, around which is placed an arrangement of glass lenses, which refract the beams from the lamp into parallel rays in the required direction. The illustration on the preceding page will give the reader a tolerably clear idea of a dioptric apparatus. The whole forms a kind of hollow-cage of polished glass around the lamp. Above the central lenses of a first order revolving light are eighteen rings of glass of triangular shape; and below it, eight triangular rings.
Thus in the catoptric system we have reflectors placed behind the lamps, and in the dioptric. system we have lenses placed in front of the lamps.
The dioptric or lenticular system has now everywhere and for all purposes displaced the catoptric, owing to the far greater intensity of its light and economy of its maintenance.
A lighthouse is wanted not only to warn ships of a particular danger,
Digitized by LnOOQle
"CATOPTRIC” AND "DIOPTRIC” SYSTEMS.
493
but to mark a particular place; so that ships—let us say—coming up Channel on a dark night, and seeing such or such a light, may know at once, and without possibility of error, where they are. That is to say, the lights must be made to differ from each other; and as the number of lights on a well-frequented coast is considerable, this will be no very easy matter. How are we to mark these differences ? Well, in the first place, some fights will be stationary, while others can be made to revolve. They may revolve, producing flashes of greater or less duration—one, two, three, or more, to the minute; or they may be occulting lights: that is, fixed lights varied by occultations at stated intervals. In the second place, we can make the lights of different colours. For instance, we can have (1) a fixed white light; (2) a revolving white; (3) revolving red and white; (4) revolving red with two whites; (5) revolving white with two reds; (6) flashing; (7) intermittent; (8) double fixed lights; (9) double revolving white lights. Mr. Stevenson, writing of catoptric lights, thus defined their distinctive features:—
It was necessary, of course, to introduce colour to obtain a sufficient number of distinctions. But colour has serious drawbacks. A red light, for instance, can only be produced by interposing a red-coloured medium between the burner and the observer’s eye, and even the best medium will absorb an enormous
THE CHAPMAN LIGHT.
(From a Drawing by W. L. Wyllie, A.R.A.y
amount of light Take the French light on Cape Gris-nez—one of the finest lights in the Channel, and a good example of a flash-light of the first class. This light gives three distinct white flashes, and then a red flash, with a very short interval of darkness between each. But in foggy weather, when the fog is
Digitized by
Google
494
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
not quite dense enough to obscure the light altogether, the three bright flashes may be seen through the haze, and then follows an interval of darkness, the red flash not showing at all.
Blue and green are utterly useless for sea lights; and even red, under the most favourable conditions, absorbs more than half the light. When the Trinity House determined to show a white light from the Wolf Rock lighthouse off the Land's End, they made many experiments, with the aid of Mr. James Chance, to find out the actual amount of light necessary to mako the red and white lights reach the same distance. And it was found that, to bo equally brilliant, the red flash required rather more than twice as much light as the white flash, and special lenses had to be made for this purpose.
In some places, in order to guide a ship through a particular channel, or indicate a particular danger, a plan has been adopted of making part of the lantern of white glass and part of coloured glass. The light shown at the Needles is of this kind. As you approach it from the south it is red, but as soon as you enter the Needles Channel it shows as a bright white light
A variation of this plan is found in the Bally cot tin lighthouse, on the south coast of Ireland, between Youghal and Cork. Here the lower panes are made of red, and the rest of the lantern of white glass. As long as you keep well out to sea and out of danger the light appears a bright one; but if you get in too close to the shore you see the light through the red panes at the bottom of the lantern, and are warned to keep off.
Another ingenious invention is the reflected light, of which there is an example at Stornoway, in the Hebrides. A lighthouse, forty-five feet high, stands on the shore. Five Im nd red and thirty feet away from it, out in the sea, there lies a dangerous rock. On this rock a beacon has been placed, and on the top of the beacon a prism with a looking-glass reflector. From a window in the lower part of the lighthouse a very powerful light is thrown on to the prism on the top of the beacon, which reflects the light, and makes it appear exactly as if it were shown from the rock.
Sailors, as a rule, greatly prefer the flashing to the fixed bright lights, since the former cannot be mistaken for ships’ lights. And nowadays a big ship will often carry a light so splendid that it can be seen four or five miles away. And, oddly enough, the introduction of the electric light has not met with the approval that might have been expected. It is incomparably the most brilliant; but, on the other hand, it has this disadvantage—that at sea it is next to impossible to judge distance by it. Any gunner in the Navy will tell you that firing at an object at night by the electric light is heart-breaking work. The fixed light at Dungeness was for some time an electric light; but in consequence of this curious defect one or two ships went ashore, and it had to be altered back again to oil.
The lighthouses around our English coast were not originally built upon any regular plan, but were set up from time to time simply because of the
Digitized by LnOOQle
MANAGEMENT OF LIGHTHOUSES.
495
disastrous losses which hod occurred from want of them. It was much the same in Franco. The British lights, though constructed on the principles of Augustin Fresnel, have been endowed with many essential improvements; and there is at present no ground for preferring those of one nation to those of another. In 1825 the French Government undertook a big scheme for thoroughly lighting their coast from point to point, each light crossing with another; so that in sailing by the French coast at night you are never without one lighthouse to guide you. The French class the lights on their shore in six
“ orders,” according to their dimensions. A first order light, if suitably elevated, may be visible at forty miles.
English lighthouses are mainly controlled and managed by a corporation known as the Trinity House of Deptford Strond—more shortly, the Trinity House, or Trinity Brethren. The Scottish lights are under the control of a board called the Commissioners of the Northern Lighthouses; and the Irish lights are looked after by the Commissioners of Irish Lights. Some of our Colonial lights are controlled by the Board of Trade. Those of our larger Colonies and of India are administered by their own governments.
In France they arc under the Minister of Public Works; likewise in Spain. In the United States a central Board man-
IX THE LIGHT CHAMBER OF A LICET HOUSE.
ages them. In other countries—such as Norway and Sweden, Austria, Turkey— they arc under the Admiralty.
The life of a lighthouse-keeper is neither easy nor very healthy. In a recent account by Mr. Julius M. Price* of a visit paid to the Bishop Rock lighthouse, off tho Scilly Isles, he says: “ I had plenty of time to look around me, for a lot of stores had to be landed; so, accompanied by the medical officer who was with us, I started on an examination of the gloomy interior, which afforded less space than I should have imagined, for it was, with the exception of two floors, blocked with machinery, and even the two living-rooms were made considerably smaller by a large compressed-air shaft running up the centre. The place struck me as being small and stuffy for four men to live in, and I remarked as much to the doctor.
“ Yes,” he replied ; “ apart from tho fact that the men don’t get sufficient exercise and pure air (for they seem to have an antipathy to open windows), tlie cubic capacity of the sleeping chamber is certainly not sufficient, and in my
* “English Illustrated MagRzino,” Sept., 1894.
Digitized by
Google
496
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
opinion this is one of the great causes of illness amongst the men and the reason why none of them can stand the life long.”
“ Do you find they suffer in health, then, as a result of this constant confinement ? ” I asked.
“ Most certainly,” he replied; “ but, apart from the confinement of the place, it is the actual solitude which tells most on the men, and they almost invariably end by falling into a state of neurasthenia—that is to say, extreme weakness of the nerves—and if they are then not at once removed to other surroundings, they end by breaking down altogether. Till I came to the islands, the men used to spend three months straight away off at a time, followed by one
MAPI. IN LIGHT AND WEST SWIN.
(rroBt a Drawing by fF. t. MV/te, ^X^.)
month on shore, blow it is altered to two weeks on and six weeks off; yet even this is not sufficient to counteract the effects of tho confinement and solitude. As a matter of fact, it is difficult to know what to do for them.
“ To form an opinion of life in a lighthouse,” the doctor continued, “ you should be here when there is a gale blowing from the north-west in tho month of November, when the night begins at four in tho afternoon, when every window has to be closed with gun-metal shutters and fixed with iron stays, and the tower positively vibrates under the force of the great seas breaking over it—in fact, it is this vibration that so upsets the men, more especially on the Bishop, for it is well remembered that the first lighthouse on this rock was washed clean away one night, and there is a superstition amongst the men in consequence that the rock is haunted and that no tower ever built there will be really safe.”
" And what do these men get paid for this dreary work ? ”
“They average from £70 to £75 a year, according to their service, out of
Digitized by Tooele
LANDING STORKS ON A LIGHTHOUSE AFTER A GALE.
32
Digitized by
Google
498
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
which they have, of course, to provide themselves with rations.” These rations, Mr. Price found, generally took the form of tinned beef and biscuit, washed down with the inevitable tea and condensed milk, for no spirituous liquor is allowed.
In spite of the hardness of the life, there are always large numbers of men on the books of Trinity House, waiting for a berth; and a number of supernumeraries are kept at Blackwall, where they go through the workshops and learn about the lights, so that, when a man is wanted, there is no delay in sending one on.
Keepers of lighthouses on shore have much smaller wages—£4 Ils. 8d. per month for the chief man, and less for his assistant. Each lighthouse will have two men in charge as a rule, and their work is hard enough. The night is divided into three watches—(1) from sunset to 11 p.m.; (2) from 11 p.m. to 4 a.m. ; and (3) from 4 a.m. to 8 a.m. The lamps will be lit in winter as early as 3.15 p.m. At 8 in the morning the man who has taken the last watch calls his mate, and both set to work to clean up the lamps, brass, panes, etc., and if this be properly done it will take them till noon. The men have also to look after the painting, the japanning of the iron-work, the mowing of tho small lawn around the lighthouse, and all necessary repairs, besides having to look after their own cottages. Unhappily, the regulations provide for no holiday throughout the year, and any man who wishes to be away must pay the railway fare of his substitute, even if the Trinity House grants him leave. The reason why, when the situation admits, the keepers live in cottages outside the lighthouse, is to avoid dust, which is most injurious to the delicate apparatus of the light-room. Great cleanliness is enforced in all that belongs to a lighthouse. Eighty years ago the elder Stevenson wrote: “ It is the most painful thing that can occur to me to have an angry correspondence with any of the keepers, and, when I come to the lighthouse, instead of having the satisfaction to meet them with approbation and welcome their family, it is distressing when one is obliged to put on a most angry countenance and demeanour.” “ This painful obligation,” wrote his late famous grandson, Robert Louis Stevenson, “has lieen hereditary in my race, I have myself, on a perfectly amateur and unauthorised inspection of the Turn berry Point, bent my brows upon the keeper on the question of storm-panes; and felt a keen pang of self-reproach when we went downstairs again, and I found he was making a coffin for his infant child, and then regained my equanimity with the thought that I had done the man a service, and when the proper inspector came he would be readier with his panes, The human race is, perhaps, credited with nioro duplicity than it deserves. The visitation of a lighthouse, at least, is a business of the most transparent nature. As soon as the boat grates on the shore, and the keepers step forward in their uniformed coats, the very slouch of the fellows’ shoulders tells their story, and the engineer may begin at once to assume his * angry countenance.’ Certainly the brass of the handrail will be clouded; and if the brass be not immaculate, certainly all will be to match—the reflectors scratched, the spare
Digitized by GOOQle
LIGHTSHIPS.
499
lamp unready, the storm-panes in the storehouse. If a light is not rather more
than middling good, it will be radically bad.”
From lighthouses we must pass to lightships. Floating lights are seldom or never placed where a situation can be found for a fixed building; the reason being that their lights must be smaller; that in violent weather there is a risk of their dragging their anchors, and thus by shifting their position, mis-
leading when they ought to guide (although, as a seldom that they do go adrift); that there is also a risk of their being run down . by passing vessels ; and that they are much more expensive to work. Three men are enough for a light-tower of the first class, and the cost of managing it will be about £350 a year; whereas a lightship will take as many as eleven men and cost about £1,300. Moreover, they must be taken into dock from time to time to be cleaned and refitted, and other lightships sent out to take their place.
There are places, however, where a light must be shown, although to build a lighthouse would be a work of extreme difficulty; and in these places recourse must be had to lightships. There arc fifty-two of these lightships around the English coasts, a larger number than in any other country. Thirteen of these fifty-two lie round about the mouth of the Thames. The Irish coast has ten, and the Scottish coast two only. The greatest depth at which any of these ride is about forty fathoms, which is the case with the Seven Stoves
matter of fact, it is very
SIGNALLING FROM A LIGHTHOUSE.
lightship between Cornwall and the Scilly Isles; she takes no less than 315 fathoms of chain cable and
three ton anchors for her moorings. But, as a rule, lightships are most required where the coast is sandy and the channels twist among shoals. The oldest lightship in the world is probably the Noro light at the entrance of the Thames. It was first placed there in 1732.
The appearance of a lightship is peculiar; a queer-shaped hull, sometimes with one mast, from which the light is shown, sometimes with two, and sometimes with three masts, and on the top of each mast a round cage. Beneath this cage hangs an octagonal lantern which (in the case of a catoptric light) will be lowered down upon deck during the day to have its reflectors polished. In many cases the light is a revolving one; the Mouse lightship, for instance, shows a green revolving light. Four sides of the octagonal lantern will be brightly lit and tour sides obscured; the whole lantern will revolve by
Digitized by
Google
500
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
clockwork slowly around the mast, so that the light and dark sides are presented alternately. The hulls of all the English lightships belonging to the Trinity House are painted a dark red, and their names—Nore, Mouse, Gull, Galloper, Seven Stones—in white letters on their sides. The Irish lightships are painted black with a white streak, and the American lightships cream colour or white. But red, which is the complementary colour of green is more conspicuous on water than any other. We shall have more to say about this when we come to talk about buoys.
It is not only on the interior of a sea lantern that its keeper’s care must be expended. In snowy weather he may have to wipe the outside of the panes
THE NOKE LIGHTSHIP.
(From a braining by IP. L. Wylfa, A. IL A.)
several times during a night; stepping out (if it be a lighthouse) in the teeth of the storm upon the narrow gangway around the light. Moreover, the tall column of a lighthouse especially opposing the violence of the wind, creates a spiral blast around itself, which whirls all manner of flying debris against the lantern—leaves, seaweed, bits of stick, and even quite large pebbles, collected by the storm. If the lighthouse stand on shore, the lantern must be raised to a great height, quite irrespectively of the distance its rays are required to carry, otherwise its panes will certainly lie bombarded and broken by these flying stones. In the Mediterranean lighthouses at certain seasons the lantern will be so completely covered with moths that the men have to go out with brooms
Digitized by Google
BIRDS ATTRACTED BY SEA-LIGHTS.
501
and sweep them away. In England—at the Eddystone, for instance—bees and other insects will collect around the lantern in great numbers. Large sea-birds fly around perpetually on dark nights; and many an edible bird has been picked up stunned on the balcony and cooked by the men for breakfast During spring and autumn, when the most of our birds migrate, they have
some queer experiences. In clear weather the birds will fly at immense heights; but on dull nights, when neither moon nor star is visible, they fly low, and enormous numbers arc killed. The keeper of the Galloper lightship, forty miles south-east of Orfordness, tells us how “ on the night of October 6th, 1883, larks, starlings, tree sparrows, titmice (common), wrens, re d-breasts, chaffinches, and plovers were picked up on
“ STEFFI NO OCT IN THE TEETH OF THE STORM ” (p. 600).
the deck, and it is calculated that from 500 to 600 struck the rigging and fell overboard. Thousands of birds were flying round the lantern from 11.30 p.m. to 4.45 a.m., their white breasts, as they dashed to
and fro in the circle of light, having the appearance of a heavy snowstorm. This was repeated on the Sth and 12th, and on the night of the 13th 160 were picked up on deck, including larks, starlings, thrushes, and redbreasts. It was thought that 1,000 struck and went overboard into the sea.”
Sometimes, during the great autumnal migrations, our lighthouses and
Digitized by
Google
502
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
lightships are literally besieged by vast flocks, that shriek round and batter against the lantern-panes in a manner that baffles all attempts at description. It is a remarkable fact, however, that of late years the birds seem to have developed an hereditary instinct by which they avoid contact with the lanterns of lighthouses. It is certain that comparatively few now fall victims to the attractions of the light.
But there are times of thick fog when the very best light at sea is useless; and then other means must be taken
UTHOLHANDS OF BllCbR WERE FLYING HOUND THE lantehn” (p. 501).
to inform a ship of her position. The simplest and earliest form of fog-signal was the ordinary bell. At the beginning of the century there was a bell upon the Bell Rock off the Frith of Forth; another at the entrance of the River
Lilley; and others round the British coasts. But there is all the difference in the world between the sound of a bell that is rung and the sound of a bell that is chimed. When a church bell is rung, the bell itself swings round and the sound is given out when its mouth is uppermost; but when a bell is merely chimed, the bell remains fixed, and only the clapper is pulled: the mouth of the bell points downwards, and
the sound produced is neither so powerful nor does it travel so far. Now, the bells used for warning ships have always been chimed only; the sound has been feeble, therefore, and in almost all cases bells have now been superseded by gongs and fog-horns. Many lightships carry Chinese gongs, of about two feet in diameter, and the keepers beat these constantly during thick weather.
Whistles, too, have been tried; but the objection to them is the difficulty of distinguishing the whistle of a lightship from that of a passing steamer.
At some few elevated points round the coast—such as Flam borough Head and Lundy Island—fog-guns are used.
During a fog in the year 1875 the Schiller was lost on the Retarrier Ledge, off Scilly, and not far from the Bishop Rock light. Three hundred souls went down with her. The official inquiry revealed a number of defects in our system of fog-signalling, and a series of experiments was carried out by Professor Tyndall on fog-signals—all involving a great deal of noise and demonstrating that tho noisiest are the best. The professor tired guns of various sizes, and soon found out that a short 54 inch howitzer, with a 3 lb. charge of powder, made a much
Digitized by
Google
FOG-SIGNALS, AND THE SYREN.
503
louder report than an 18-pounder with the same weight of charge. Next he tried guns with different forms of muzzle, and one of them, which had a parabolic muzzle, proved to be the best in throwing the sound out over the sea, and not wasting it to rearward over the land. Then he turned to the different kinds of explosives. Fine-grained powder, as imparting a more rapid shock to the air, made more noise than coarse-grained. But gun-cotton was loudest of all The reports were heard at distances varying from two to thirteen and a half miles.
8THEN.
There are various wavs of exploding this gun-cotton. At the Bishop Rock lighthouse, for instance, close to the spot where the Schiller was lost, a four-ounce charge is hung from the roof and exploded by electricity, and two of these charges are fired every five minutes during ^Sy weather. Or gun - cotton may be used in rockets, as it was for some time at Flamborough Head. The rocket, with a four-ounce charge, ascended 600 feet in the air before the guncotton exploded, and from such a height the sound spread well over the sea.
But, as fog-signals, these guns and rockets have two or three defects, tho chief of which is that their sound continues for a very little time; and before Professor Tyndall made his experiments, the Americans had invented, in 1872, that most powerful of all sound-producing instruments, the syren.
The syren may be shortly described as a gigantic trumpet blown by steam or compressed air. Across the throat of this trumpet is fixed a metal disc, with twelve radiating slits in it, just like an ordinary ventilator. Behind this disc, which is fixed, is another disc, also having twelve slits, which is movable, and driven round by a separate mechanism, so that, as it rotates, it alternately opens and closes the slits in tho fixed disc.
Imagine, now, the pressure of air or steam to be pouring up the tube. With every turn of the movable disc, each of its open slits will coincide onco with each of the open slits of the fixed disc—that is to say, that twelve times in each revolution a puff of steam or air will escape through all the twelve openings into the mouth of the trumpet. Now, as the movable disc is made to spin round at the rate of 2,400 revolutions a minute, it follows that there will be
Digitized byVrOOQlC
504
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
twelve times 2,400, or 28,800, distinct puffs of air or steam in the minute. A sound of surpassing power is thus produced.
The syren had recently been invented and patented in the United States when, in 1872, a committee from the Trinity House—consisting of Sir Frederick.
Arrow, Captain Webb, and Mr. Price Edward s— went over to America to examine and report upon the methods, of signalling there in use. These gentlemen saw, heard, and examined the syren, and apparently did
A CHEQUERED SUOY.
(From Draidn?* by IF. 1. Wyllit, A.R.A,}
not think very much of it But one of the new instruments was set up on the South Foreland in the following year, and proved such a success that syrens are now gradually superseding all other means of fog-signalling around the British coasts.
We now come to buoys. These also are under the management of the Trinity House. Until the thirty-sixth year of Queen Elizabeth, the Lord High Admiral looked after them; but in that year (1594) her Majesty granted to the Corporation of the Trinity House of Deptford Strend the right of “ making, erecting, setting up, placing or laying out, all buoys, beacons, marks, and signs for the sea and seashore, to hold the same with all profits and emoluments thereunto belonging, as of the Manor of East Greenwich, in free and common
Digitized by
Google
BUOYS.
505
soccage.” When any public buoy is laid down, the Trinity House gives notice of its form, colour, situation, and purpose; and if a buoy be removed either by accident or design, the Trinity House must give notice of such removal
The best shape for a buoy is still a matter of opinion, but the question of colour has been so far settled that black and red are now the only colours used singly in painting buoys, and even these are not very easily distinguished from each other on the sea. White was used singly at one time, but, in the first place, it would not stand the weather; and, secondly, in certain lights, or in a sea with any surf, it was very hard to distinguish. It used to be found, too,
TRE WHIVEKINU SAND BELL BUOY.
(from a Drav.-ing by IF, L. Wyllie, A.R.A.}
that the dirtier a white buoy was allowed to get, the easier it was to see. White is now used only on parti-coloured buoys.
The system of marking the entrance to a port or channel by buoys is always the same. As you enter, all the buoys on your starboard hand are painted either red or black only: the buoys on your port hand are either chequered (red and white or black and white) or striped vertically. Middle buoys are of black or red, with white horizontal stripes,
AU buoys are made either of iron or wood. But iron is almost always used for large buoys, and wood only for mooring and warping buoys.
Sometimes, to mark it better, a buoy will have some device on top, such as a ball, or lozenge, or triangle; and there are other inventions, such as a beU-buoy, a whistling-buoy, and a gas-buoy.
In the case of the first, a boU inside an iron cage is rigged up on the top of an ordinary buoy with four hammers round it, which swing on pivots, so that, whichever way the buoy is tilted by the sea, one of these hammers strikes
Digitized by LnOOQle
506 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
on the bell. And so it goes on tolling all day and all night, and giving forth perhaps the most weird and death-like sound upon earth or sea. There is one those bell-buoys moored above the Runnelstone, off the Land's End, of which Mr. McMullen writes: “ Passing between the Lee Oar and the Runnelstone, we tacked close to tho bell-buoy, which was lustily tolling out its most dismal warning. Its tolling is so eccentric, so irregular, that it would soon drive a musician mad. I know no sounds more unpleasant on a dark night, or more calculated to make one feel miserable, than the roar of the sea in a cavern, and the tolling of a bell-buoy. These buoys, however, are of such immense service that I should like to see them more generally used.” Mr. Price writes, on the other hand: " The actual utility of the bell-buoys is, to my mind, doubtful, for on a rough night, by the time the sound of these bells was heard, a vessel would be a long way out of her course, and be very close indeed to the danger, almost too close, in fact, for it to be averted. It occurs to me that the gas-lit lantern-buoys must be far more efficacious.”
It may be of interest here to mention, as giving some idea of the responsibilities attached to the position of superintendent of the district, that once this buoy (the Runnelstone bell-buoy) managed to break adrift, just as the fleet was starting from Falmouth, bound west. As soon as this was learnt, telegrams had to be sent to every naval station of the kingdom, and Captain Reading informed me that he did not sleep in peace till he knew that the runaway was once more secured. Some idea of the force of the sea around here may be gathered when one learns that this particular buoy is moored by no less than two two-ton sinkers and ninety fathoms of heavy chain cable.”
The whistling-buoy is contrived in this way: An ordinary whistle is fixed on the top of tho buoy, and below the whistle an iron tube passed through the buoy and deep down into the water. This tube, being open at the bottom, was of course full of water as far up as the surface of the sea, and as the buoy rose and fell on the waves the water in the lube forced the air up through the whistle, and gave a loud blast But the same objection applies to these buoys as to the whistles on lightships: they arc too much like steamers’ whistles.
Tho gas-buoy has found more favour than either of these inventions. This buoy is filled with gas sufficient to last for a month or so, and on the top of it is a gas-burner inside a lantern turned'by clockwork: so that we have hero a revolving light on a small scale. Of course, the gas keeps burning day and night, and the Trinity House tender must come pretty often to renew the supply. But since first a buoy of this pattern was tried in the Thames, at the bottom of the Gravesend Reach, the invention has proved a decided success, and gas-buoys are now fairly common.
There are considerably over a thousand buoys moored round the coast of England and in the channels of its chief rivers, and tho position of all of them has to be verified every three months, since any one by breaking adrift might mislead a ship and cause incalculable damage.
Digitized by LnOOQle
CHAPTER XXI.
ABOUT BREAKWATERS.
What a Breakwater Is—Floating Breakwaters—Hubble Mound Breakwaters—The Violence of the Wares at Wick—Various Materials Used—Masonry Pitching—Concrete—Solid Masonry—Cherbourg Breakwater— Do Cessart’s Plan—Works Abandoned—Recommenced and Completed under Bonnin—Recent Improvements—Torpedo Attack—Plymouth Breakwater—Effect of Storms On It—Cost and Material Used—Portland—Tho Chcsil Bank—Use of Staging—Tho Northern Fort—Fresh Works—Fortifications— Alderney: tho Breakwater a Failure—Dover Pier—The Mole of Caligula—Alexandria: Great Rapidity of Construction—Port Slid Jetties—Manoni—Sloping Block System—Use of Cranes—■ Huge Blocks of Concrete.
A BREAKWATER may be best defined as an artificial structure to give shelter to shipping. It differs from a pier, since the latter is erected for convenience rather than shelter, and is intended to facilitate the landing of passengers or cargo. It differs from a jetty, since jetties have as their chief object the direction and control of currents. Of course, a breakwater may also control currents, but it is not built for this purpose; it may be used as a pier, as is the case at Dover; but this, again, is not its end.
The breakwater is necessitated by the fact that Nature does not always place harbours exactly where tho requirements of trade or the demands of naval authorities would have them. Thus along the north cm coast of Franco there is no really good natural port from Brest to Calais. And on the opposite side of the Channel, though we are more fortunate than our neighbours, we have nothing but artificial harbours between Dartmouth and the Solent, between Portsmouth and the mouth of the Thames. India, again, on its eastern coast is singularly devoid of good ports. Wherever, then, this is the case, the niggardliness of Nature must be supplemented by the skill of man.
Breakwaters may be divided into four heads. First of these comes a somewhat discredited fancy—the Boating breakwater. Some arrangement of logs in rafts securely moored was employed by the great Roman engineers. Early in this century floating havens of refuge were proposed for our southern coast. One was to be moored off Dungeness, and was to be composed of a double line of rafts in the form of a C. It was, however, never employed. Again, at La Ciotat, where the water is very deep, a structure composed of a double line of buoys, so arranged that the breaks in the one line were covered by the buoys of the other, was actually put in place. But in the first severe storm
Digitized by Vioocle
508
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
they broke from their moorings, and no longer resisted the force of the waves. The same was the case when the Great Eastern was lying off Holyhead. As long as her cables held she acted as a floating breakwater, and sheltered the small craft in the harbour admirably. But the strain on the moorings in rough weather is so excessive that they can never be made strong enough to withstand it. None the less it is now proposed to protect the port of Monaco by a breakwater of this description.
Floating breakwaters being dismissed as a somewhat illusory protection, we
Photo Frith (t Co.. Rgig^, PORTLAND BREAKWATER,
come now to the second kind. This is formed by discharging a mixture of large and small stones into the sex They must be continually cast in till the mound they form emerges above the surface. The action of the waves which steadily beat upon them reduces them in time to a natural slope. As the chief force of the sea is exerted between the level of high-water mark and some twelve feet below low-water mark, this is the most critical point in the structure. Consequently, if the waters are stormy, a slope of one in ten is the result, unless the stones be very large. Twelve feet below low-water the slope becomes, as a rale, steeper, till near the bottom it is as sharp as one in one. Of course, the slope will entirely depend upon the violence of the waves, and these, again, can only attain their full power when they sweep over a wide stretch of sex In British waters twenty-seven feet is their greatest height, whilst in the Atlantic they are often as high again. Regard must be
Digitized by
Google
METHODS OF CONSTRUCTING BREAKWATERS.
509
had, then, to the geographical position of the place which is to be sheltered. Manifestly a breakwater which has, as at Alderney, to face the Atlantic with some three thousand miles of open water, must be very different from one which, like that at Dover, meets only the waves of a channel twenty-two miles wida Once more, if the water is shallow, the waves cannot be formidable, as they break before they have attained their full size, but what their power is when
Photo. Frith & CV.. Htigalt.
ADMIRALTY PIER, DOVjm,
the conditions are favourable to their violence, and when they rise from a deep and extensive sea, may be divined from an occurrence at Wick, where a mass of masonry set in cement, and weighing no less than 1,350 tons, which stood at the end of the Wick breakwater, was in a single storm broken loose from the rest of the structure and, without being disintegrated, turned round as if on a pivot, forced off its foundations, and driven to the inside of the pier.
The breakwater of hewn stone—or rubble, as it is called—is seldom entirely satisfactory unless it is capped with masonry. However large are the blocks, there is always wear and tear owing to the action of the waves, and the structure, unless fresh stone is regularly added, gradually disappears below the surface. Yet where the seas are not violent, and where the blocks used
Digitized by Google
51.0
THE STOHY OF THE SEA.
near the surface are very Urge, it will last. At Alexandria concrete blocks weighing no less than twenty tons have been employed with success. It need scarcely be said that smaller stones or blocks can be used near the bottom and on the inside of the breakwater. The ideal method is to have the smallest rubble at the bottom and centre, the largest stones on the surface and exposed side, and those of intermediate size facing the whole inner portion and the lowest part of the outer slope. To graduate the size of the material whilst depositing it takes additional time, but it has been done with economical results at Algiers. For the under-water portions fascines have been employed in America at Galveston and Charleston. They are formed of bundles of brushwood, which are fastened together into a mattress, then weighted with stones, which are attached to them securely, and sunk. The drift and silt of the sea gathers round them, and they give very efficient protection. They' have, moreover, the great virtue of cheapness, where stone is not at hand.
We have said that protection to the top of the breakwater by large stones is seldom satisfactory. Further the breakwater formed in this way must, necessarily be low, and cannot give that complete shelter which is desirable in rough weather. The sea breaks over it, and is likely to injure shipping in the harbour* whilst the stones at the top are constantly ground and shifted by the waves—if, indeed, they arc not bodily lifted from the mound and thrown over the breakwater. It is therefore usual to finish the structure with masonry or concrete. The latter material has enabled our engineers to achieve feats which their ancestors would never have imagined possible. Concrete is a mixture of cement of the best kind with water and fragments of stone, the rougher the better, though their size should never exceed two inches in diameter, and it will set well even when submerged It must, however, be laid on the bottom in masses; else it will be disintegrated in its fall To place it upon the bottom it is usually enclosed in coarse canvas bags, which may contain any weight up to one or even two hundred tons. As the mixture is lowered before it has set, it will take any shape, and, oozing through the pores of the canvas, forms a compact mass with that already in place. It is sometimes shot down slides, enclosed in strong paper, which bursts when it is wetted at tho bottom, allowing the concrete to escape and adhere to that which has been laid. To deposit concrete special barges called “hoppers” aro used, the peculiarity of which lies in a large well in which the material is mixed, after the cloth or canvas has been fixed in position round the sides of the well. Whilst the barge is steaming to the scene of action the mouth of the bag is sewn up. Arrived at the required place the folding doors at the bottom of the well are opened by withdrawing a pin. and the mass is deposited.
* At Bl vic, where there is a low breakwater, a vessel was on one occasion earned right over it, in a violent storm, by the sea, and placed in safety, the captain’s hair turning white, it is said, in the horror of the experience.
Digitized by LnOOQle
FAMOUS BREAKWATERS.
511
The nibble mound having settled—and this takes from two to four years, though even then subsidences may occur, as at Alderney—the foundations for the masonry are laid, either with concrete or by means of divers. The lower the masonry begins the better, and it should always, where the exposure is great, commence about twelve feet below low-water. The waves break against the superstructure of the breakwater, and, recoiling from it, exert a violent scour to a considerable depth. This was forgotten at Alderney, in days when breakwaters were less numerous, and the action of the sea was ill-understood; and in consequence the foundations were laid bare and worn away. At Cherbourg it has been found necessary to protect the base of the masonry with large concrete blocks. The superstructure should be sunk some feet into the mound, to avoid injury to its foundation. With perfectly smooth stonework rising from tho water the waves can do little mischief, provided the masonry is strong enough to absorb their blow. The shelter given becomes very real, for the seas cannot break right over it, but are deflected upwards, rising sometimes two hundred feet in the air. The rubble mound is protected by the masonry where it is most exposed, and the inner side of the breakwater cun in fair weather be used as quay. Hence we find that this third type is very generally employed: Cherbourg, Holyhead, the shorter Portland breakwater, Alderney, and Colombo, are instances.
The fourth kind is, as a rule, used only in somewhat shallow water, and consists of a masonry or concrete structure, rising straight from the bottom without any rubble mound. It is the most expensive to construct, but the least expensive to maintain. The Admiralty pier at Dover is of this nature, built of stone and concrete, and still more recent examples are the Newhaven breakwaters. Their base is formed of bags of concrete, each weighing one hundred tons, and of the exact breadth of tho structure. With this description of breakwater the chief difficulty experienced is in laying the foundations, as the bottom of the sea must be carefully levelled for them.
Of all the breakwaters throughout the world, by far the most famous is that at Cherbourg. This place lies opposite to Portland, and about sixty-five miles distant from it. In the last century, Franco found the absence of a good naval harbour in the Channel a great disadvantage to her during her wars with England. Her fleet would have escaped the destruction that befell it at La Hogue if it had had some place in which to take refuge. As early as 1665 the construction of a breakwater at Cherbourg was proposed; but the engineers of the age were unequal to the task. A century later it was suggested to sinl<. ships loaded with stone across the mouth of the bay, but this scheme was abandoned as too expensive.
Tho present work may be said to have been begun in 1781 by M. de Cessart As the bay is sheltered from westerly winds by Cape de la Hogue, and on the east by Cape Barfleur, he proposed to protect the anchorage from northerly winds by a number of stone islands. These were to be constructed in the
Digitized by Goode
512
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
following way: Upon the foreshore huge cones of timber, 150 feet in diameter at the bottom, and 65 feet at the top, were built up. They were, when completed, floated with the help of the tide, towed to the required spot, and filled with stone till they sank. The stones in them were not built into a compact mass with mortar and iron clamps, but were left quite loose. The cones were to stand in a line beside one another, touching at the bottom, but separate at the top, yet the space between was to be too small to allow the passage of a man-of-war. The first cone was got into place in June, 1784, but as the progress made was
OLD CHERBOURG BREAKWATER {CfUCA l»W), SHOWING THE CONES.
(front a» ota Print.)
very slow, and only two or three cones could be sunk each year, it was decided to place them at intervals of 1,200 feet with loose stones between. In 1789 only eighteen were in place, and these were repeatedly injured by the waves. It was then determined to cut them down to low-water mark, leaving only the one which marked the east end of the breakwater standing. This, however, quickly collapsed, though it had been protected by a coating of concrete.
The work was abandoned in 1790, after some 3,480,000 cubic yarda of stone had been east into the sea. During the ensuing years it remained uncompleted. The mound, which had originally a steep slope, was gradually flattened by the action of the sea to the depth of fifteen feet below low-water, but the lowest part remained unchanged. As the top of the breakwater
Digitized by GOOQle
THE STORY OF THE BUILDING. 513
disappeared below the surface of the sea, it ceased to give protection, and Cherbourg was once more an open port. In 1802, however, the First Consul Napoleon gave orders for the mound to be raised in the centre, where now Fort Central stands, and for a battery to be constructed upon it. He does not seem to have had any idea of reconstructing the breakwater, but simply to have wished to protect the harbour from an English descent. Large blocks were accordingly placed upon the centre, and on these again the battery was reared. It was substantially built, and had large cisterns and casemates in its foundations. But in 1808 it was swept away in six hours by a violent
CHERBOURG BRKAX WATER.
storm, and all its garrison perished, except a very few, who took refuge in the cisterns. Onoe more repaired, it was again severely damaged by a north-northeasterly storm in 1810. The indefatigable engineers built it up for a third time, and it lasted till 1824, when a fresh stonn wrecked it In 1825 it was renewed for the fourth time. All this while the mound under water had remained untouched. But in 1830 the French Government decided that at all costs a good harbour must be constructed in the Channel, and directed M. Bonnin to complete the breakwater.
He decided to abandon the employment of cones, and simply to discharge rubble into the water till the mound once more emerged. Further, since experience had shown that rubble alone could not last, he determined to build upon this mound a superstructure of masonry, which was to protect its surface. The rubble stones were discharged from barges of special construction which were towed to the breakwater by two steam-tugs. The stone was mainly 33
Digitized by GOOQle
514 THE STOEY OF THE SEA.
quarried from the Mount du Roule, a steep rock, 380 feet high, which rises to the south of the town. Four years were allowed for the mass of stones to consolidate, and then the masonry was begun. The superstructure was completed from end to end for a length of 4,100 yards in 1846, and then the great central fort and the two works of defence at each end were taken in hand. Each of these three forts has a little harbour protected by miniature jetties, so that it is always possible to land at them in any state of the weather. The whole breakwater with all its works was completed in 1853, and since that time it has withstood the most furious storms. In its colossal size it rivals the Pyramids and justifies the proud boast inscribed under the statue of Napoleon I. which looks out over it: “I will rival at Cherbourg the wonders of Egypt.” The base is 300 feet wide, and the masonry at the top 31 feet. There is a road running the whole way along it, with a high parapet, and upon it are mounted some forty-eight guns of seven and a half inches. The forts contain the most powerful ordnance, and in the central one four forty-seven ton were recently mounted. There is still a certain amount of wear and tear upon the rubble mound, and to compensate for this 4,500 cubic yards of stone are annually deposited along the front.
As originally completed, however, this huge work failed to give quite satisfactory protection. With the development of torpedo-boats, it became possible for these small craft to steal round the breakwater and fall upon the ships at anchor within. The French theory’ is, that when a ship is in a naval harbour it must be absolutely secure from all harm. In consequence, it was decided to narrow the entrances by two fresh breakwaters. The western one starts from Fort Querqueville, and runs out to the reef on which is built Fort Chavagnac, leaving an opening 500 yards wide. The eastern one starts from the Batterie des Greves and runs out to the tie Pel de, on which stands Fort National, leaving a passage 1,000 yards wide. There is a small opening for the exit of torpedo-boats in the eastern breakwater, but it is placed in shallow water and can easily be closed. It might still be possible for torpedo-boats to run through the two large openings, for, though a storm of fire can be concentrated upon them, a boat has to be seen before guns can be laid upon it, and recent experiments would show that even under a search-light a boat is invisible at 800 yards. Running at thirty miles an hour, it would cross this zone of danger in one minute, and might escape without being disabled. Of course the harbour is open to submarine boats, but measures are being taken to prevent their entrance. The port and dockyard of Cherbourg are also somewhat exposed to bombardment by long-range guns, since the advance of artillery has rendered it possible to throw a shell five or six miles. To obviate this it is now proposed to construct concrete islands some distance in advance of the great breakwater, and to build forts upon them. But this would involve an enormous expenditure of money.
The second great breakwater in historical sequence is that which protects
Digitized by GOOQle
PLYMOUTH BREAKWATER.
515
Plymouth Sound. It was begun in 1812, with Mr. Rennie as engineer. The Sound before this work was completed was exposed to all winds between eastsouth-east, and west-south-west, and though sheltered on the west by Rame Head is open to the full fury of the Atlantic, having no land between it and South America. It was, then, a very much more arduous undertaking than the work at Cherbourg; but it was absolutely necessary for the protection of the harbour, which had been much used by English mcn-of-war in the blockade of Brest during the struggle with France. Its construction was first proposed in 1806, but it could not be begun till six years later. At first it was only intended to be raised to half-tide level, when, of course, it would have been submerged at high water. But as the work progressed its scope was steadily extended. It was designed in a straight line, with two slightly angular arms
at each end to interfere less five boats and ten vessels of each four lines of rail laid on quarries on shore. The stone
with the currents. To deposit the stone forty -special construction were employed. These had them, and the trucks were run upon them from used was limestone from the Catwater, and the
largest blocks weighed ten tons. The discharge of stone was commenced in the centre, and the work was simultaneously carried towards each end. In 1814 the mound began to show at low water, and afforded very real shelter to shipping. The largest amount of stone deposited in any one year was 373,000 tons in 1824. In the quarries, as to-day at Llanberis, the blasting was carried on at certain fixed hours; the -workers, having been warned by a bell or horn, withdrew, the fuses were lighted, and the sides of the rock fell with a succession of crashes.
The slope of the breakwater on the outer side was originally designed as one in three. But in 1817, during a violent storm, the rubble stone was displaced between high- and low-water mark for a distance of 600 feet, and huge blocks weighing five tons were cast over the breakwater on to the harbour slope, thus reducing the trend of the stones to one in five near the surface. Fresh rubble was deposited, and the slope was restored to its original angle. But on the 23rd of November, 1824, a still more violent storm, blowing in succession from south-south-east and south-west, once more restored the inclination of the side to one in five. The old slope was not therefore restored, and it was decided to accept the decision of the sea. Further in 1825, after a full consideration of the action of the 1824 stonn upon the upper portion of the breakwater, it was resolved to pitch the top with granite set in cement. This would protect the rubble from disintegration at the point where it is most exposed to the violence of the sea. After the mound had been allowed to settle, this task was begun in 1830. For the lower courses the diving-bell was employed, but the upper ones were completed by masons in fine weather. The stones were dovetailed and fastened together with iron cramps. In 1833 the work was finally completed, after 634,000 tons of masonry had been added to the original 3,620,000 tons. The cost of the work
Digitized by oogle
516
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
was £1,500,000, or far less than the £2,674,000 which was expended at Cherbourg. But the Plymouth work is less than half the length of its French rival, being only 1,700 yards from end to end. It is much exposed on the south-west, where it meets the Atlantic, and there stone has continually to be deposited, ns the waves displace the rubble down to ten feet below the low-water level of spring tides; 25,500 tons are annually required to replace the constant wear and tear.
During our last war with France, Nelson had often deplored the absence-
of any good harbour between Start Point and Portsmouth. Even before this, the Postmaster of Weymouth had urged the construction of a harbour and breakwater at Portland. The situation is very favourable, for the Chesil bank and the rocky Portland Isle shelter the deep bay on the west, so that tho
only winds to be feared are south-easterly ones. The Chesil bank is a long and narrow mound of shingle swept by the scour of the sea from the coast to the east of Portland Bill Its size varies, and by the great gale of 1824, to which allusion has already been made, it was lowered twelve feet in a single night; had the storm lasted a few hours longer, it might have disappeared
P/loto. IF. Gregory A Co,, Strand, W.O A DIVER.
necessary for the governor of the prison to officials should never move about the island in
altogether. At the present time there is a shallow passage through it which is crossed by the road and railway. In 1843 -a Parliamentary Committee reported that a harbour was required here — driven to this conclusion, perhaps, by the rapid progress of Cherbourg, which confronts iL Accordingly plans were made under the supervision of Mr. Rendel, and in 184£> a prison was built on the isle and serious work began. The inhabitants of Portland, though old, experienced smugglers, strongly objected to the employment of convicts, and showed their resentment by murderous attacks upon the warders, so that it was issue an order that these parties of less than six or
Digitized by GOOQle
PORTLAND BREAKWATER.
517
seven. To deposit the stone a wooden viaduct one and a half miles long on huge screw piles was built out into the bay. In fixing the piles great difficulties were encountered, and storms repeatedly damaged the wooden staging. Five lines of rails were laid upon the viaduct, and the stone was run out along there in trucks and tipped where required. To construct the Northern Fort, which stands at the extremity of the outer breakwater, piles were set in two circles of 112 and 224 feet diameter, and, pivoting in the centre, was
Ffwto. W. Gregory £ Co., StranJ, TF.C.
DIVER HEADT TO DESCEND,
a huge travelling crane stretching out its beam, like the hand of a clock, over the rails, and dragging round after it trains loaded with fifty or sixty tons of stone. As the rubble and stone were deposited—there being three tons of large blocks to every seven tons of small stones—divers levelled the foundations. Finally, the outer walls of the circular island having been completed, the inside was filled up to the extent required, and thus a three-storied work was built up, having on its lowest floor magazines and on its two upper ones batteries. It is further protected by thick armour, and is painted with a' chessboard pattern to conceal the actual embrasures of the guns. Though of terrific strength for the date at which it was completed, it may be doubted whether it could successfully withstand modern artillery and high explosives.
The breakwater itself is in two sections parted by a gap of 400 feet. The smaller one is 1,900 feet, and runs from the Isle in an east-north-easterly ■direction. Like the Cherbourg work, it is of rubble crowned with a very broad masonry top, which carries two roads, one raised above the other. Under the upper roadway are arches which are used for Government stores. The lower road serves as a quay, and is largely used by men-of-war for coaling. The outer breakwater is detached, and has a length of 6,200 feet
Digitized by
Google
518
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
It is of very different structure from the other, having no masonry, but simply very large blocks of stone on its surface; and as it is not in an exposed situation, gives satisfaction. The total amount of stone used was 5,800,000 tons, obtained from a quarry of the enormous area of fifteen acres. If the material used in the construction of the breakwater were piled in a column. 100 feet in diameter, it would overtop the Alps. The greatest amount tipped in any one year was rather over half a million tons, and the cost from beginning to end was £1,033,600. The slopes of the mound of stone are still liable to injury between high- and low-water mark in stormy weather, when the stones of the outer slope are displaced, and occasionally the seas breaking over it disturb the inner side, sometimes removing as much as three thousand tons in a single day. ,
As at Cherbourg, so here, the advent of the torpedo has rendered fresh works necessary. The harbour is the regular gathering place of the English squadrons in the manoeuvres, and would be assuredly used in the event of war. But it is lamentably open to attack by torpedo boats, and is within some six hours’ easy steam of Cherbourg. The Government have repeatedly been urged to take steps to render it secure, and repeated entreaties have at last had tho desired effect. The breakwater is to be ultimately prolonged, but, meanwhile, steps are being taken to render the entrance of hostile craft difficult. With that object stone columns called dolphins are to be built up in the water in a lino to the north of the present structure. The tops will be above water, and strong booms will be moored to them. Though torpedoboats have occasionally succeeded in either “jumping” or running under these obstructions, they will give an additional measure of security. But the sheltered water will still be open to the submarine boat, and though this is at present in a very undeveloped stage, it will undoubtedly be perfected in the near future. Hence the prolongation of the breakwater is the only really satisfactory defence, and we shall be driven to it sooner or later.
The protection of the harbour against large ships is well assured by forts. At the extreme end of each breakwater is a strong circular work; and on the heights of the Isle, 488 feet above the sea, stands the Vern, a large pentagonal fort mounting numerous heavy guns, which can fire down upon any ship with tremendous effect The steep eastern bluffs have further a scries of earthwork batteries, one above the other, which go by the name of Fort Weir. Though the casual observer sees little trace of fortifications from the sea, these works are all the more formidable since one of the requisites of modern defences is invisibility. But, after all, whilst the English fleet is unbeaten, it will not want protection. Its object is rather to go in search of its opponents, than to lie inactive whilst they are cannonading our fortresses. And if we are once crushed at sea, no miles of stonework can save us. The modern strategist looks upon the elaborate defences of Portland as waste of money, which had been better employed in building ships. But our ironclads
Digitized by LnOOQle
ALDERNEY.
519
must have harbours to coal and refit in, and must be free from the danger of torpedo attack 'whilst in them, so breakwaters are necessary.
■ At Alderney is a fourth colossal work, which was begun at about the same date as Portland. The island lies within a very short distance of Cape de la Hogue, and is within admirable striking range of Cherbourg, to which it might be an effective “ nose-pincher,” as the Germans say. A squadron of torpedo boats stationed here would be able to impede very seriously any movements from the French harbour. The value of Alderney was understood in 1847: it is forgotten to-day. An immense breakwater was constructed with a base of rubble, as at Cherbourg, and a superstructure of stone and concrete. But the whole history of it is one long series of mishaps. Its original length was 4,680 feet, though it was to have been carried out to a yet greater distance. The Atlantic beats upon this island with its full force, and the waves have an extent of three thousand miles of ocean upon which to gather strength. The rubble mound was constructed with too steep a slope on the outer face, and the lesson of the sea at Plymouth was forgotten. After four years had been allowed for settlement, the superstructure was commenced. The lower courses were necessarily laid by divers, and in so exposed a situation divers can only work in the summer months. The masonry was, therefore, built in patches, and, as the mound beneath it subsided under the action of the waves, cracks opened between the various sections. Above water they were filled with cement: under water little could be done. Storms came, and the terrific force of the water compressed the air in the interstices between the stones, owing to these cracks: and, as the air had no means of escape, it forced out the masonry in the facing. In 1865 the work was twice breached, and each successive year has seen more or less damage inflicted. At last, weary of constant repairs, it was decided to abandon the outer portion of the breakwater, and to maintain only 2,856 feet of it. Of the abandoned part two portions, measuring respectively 100 and 740 feet, remain at high water, if, indeed, they have not vanished by now. Thus the work of the British Government has been destroyed. In France, the Government, loaded by the huge debt of the disastrous war with Germany, decided to repair a damaged breakwater at Biarritz, which was of very slight utility, lest it should be said that a work belonging to the French State lay in ruins.
Of the fourth type of breakwater, which consists of a structure of masonry or concrete, without any base of stone or rubble, there are very numerous examples on our coast. But most of them fall under the head of pier or jetty, rather than breakwater. The Admiralty Pier at Dover is of interest as the oldest structure of this description in England. It is 2,100 feet long, and cost no less than £679,000, or £323 a foot. Its price was, therefore, twice as great as that paid for a rubble breakwater. The greater expensiveness of this description of protection is due to the large amount of divers’ work necessary. Diving-bells were used at Dover, as in them men can work in any weather
Digitized by GOOQle
520 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
whilst in a diving dress it is impossible for a man to descend and exert himself in cold or rough weather. The chalk bottom, at a depth of 45 feet, was first carefully levelled: then blocks of ashlar granite were lowered from staging, and put in place on each face by the divers, whilst the space between was filled with concrete. The structure was severely damped by a violent storm in 1877, and to a less extent a few years ago, but has stood very well At the outer end of it is a huge turret, with 24 inches of iron upon it, containing two 81-ton guns. Since an English harbour is very much wanted by our Navy in these waters, as a reply to Calais, it is probable that the breakwater will be extended considerably at no very distant date. The commercial port is at the present time being improved, and not before it was necessary, as the construction of the Admiralty Pier has caused a very perceptible silting up of the harbour to the north of the breakwater. It is interesting to notice that one of the oldest harbour works existing is similar in type to the Dover Pier. The Mole of Caligula at Bake still stands. It is composed of pillars of brickwork, let down in caissons to the bottom, and cemented together with Puzzolana mortar. When above the surface of low-water level, arches were constructed upon the brickwork, and above these again a quay was built. It has withstood time and the sea, and is to-day nearly as firm as it must have been when first built.
ALOIEUU BREAKWATERS.
The progress in engineering skill which marks the nineteenth century is very clearly seen in the construction of the great breakwater at Alexandria. This is 9,675 feet long, and is constructed entirely of rubble and huge blocks of concrete. But, whilst the works at Cherbourg occupied from first to last a period of seventy-two years—in which, it is true, there were many intervals
Digitized by Tooele
POET SAID, COLOMBO, ETC.
521
when nothing was done to the mound—the Alexandria breakwater was completed in the short space of two years. It is situated in calmer seas, but none the
Both of these are built of large concrete blocks, but in their case
no rubble or small stones were employed. The sand, which is very troublesome on this coast, finds its way, in consequence, through the interstices, and constant dredging is necessary in the channel leading to the Suez Canal The coast is rapidly gaining on the sea, owing to the immense amount of deposit brought down by the Nile, and will, sooner or later, render a prolongation of the works necessary.
Other modern structures (to omit the great American breakwaters, which are, as a rale, incomplete) are those at Madras and Manora, on the Indian coast, and Colombo, in Ceylon. At Manora the mistake made at Alderney was repeated. The rubble base was not allowed to settle thoroughly, and the superstructure built of two rows of concrete blocks, side by side, settled unevenly. Gaps opened between the two sets of blocks, and those at the top were forced off It is hard, however, for Nature to worst an engineer, and a method of constructing breakwaters has now’ been devised which is absolutely uninjured by uneven subsidences. This method, which was simultaneously applied at Kustendji and Colombo, consists in laying the blocks in a slope.
Digitized by
Google
522
THE STORY • OF THE BEA.
They can then settle without causing cracks, as the layers are not cemented together. When subsidence has altogether ceased, the top of the blocks is covered with cement. There is here, therefore, little possibility of injury by the waves, unless one of the outer blocks is bodily dislodged; and, if this happens, it can be replaced with little trouble. It is, then, no exaggeration to say that the sloping block system is one of the great inventions of modern times.
Two other great advances have been made in our days. The first is tho improvement in crams. These are now made to overhang, and so deposit the stones. Staging, which was so much employed at Portland, is then rendered
Photo. FrUh A: Co., Rtigatc. F011T 8AIl> BREAKWATER,
unnecessary. The progress of the work has thus been greatly expedited, since staging can only be laid in fine weather, and a series of storms prevents the possibility of a speedy advance. Then, too, the piles on which tho staging is carried are
always liable to be washed away, or to be severely injured by a tempest They are cheaper at the commencement, doubtless, but in the long run cranes are more economical. As the breakwater is run out, rails arc laid along it, and on these the huge machine travels. It is generally high enough above the roadway to enable tnicks of a narrower gauge to pass underneath. There have been occasional instances of cranes being carried away by the waves, but this can be easily prevented by running back the implement each night after use. A further advantage w’hich arises from the employment of such machinery is that blocks of any size can be handled. Our ancestors would never have dreamt of employing monoliths of forty tons weight, because they had no appliances to lift them. Yet the Goliath at Tynemouth successfully accomplishes this feat And this brings us to the second great improvement, which is in the use of large blocks. The rougher the sea, and the nearer the surface, the greater must be the size of the masses of stone or
Digitized by GOOQle
CHIEF BREAKWATERS OF THE WORLD.
523
concrete employed. It is this knowledge which has enabled hydraulic engineers to construct with such ease works like those of Alexandria, Algiers, Port Said, and Biarritz. When M. de Cessart set to work at Cherbourg he had neither steam nor machinery at his disposal It is this fact which renders his achievement and his daring so wonderful The Americans, with a resourcefulness and versatility peculiar to their branch of our race, have achieved much also by audacious innovation. Yet Delaware breakwater, which is alone, perhaps, comparable to the great works in the Channel, is built upon the same plan as the outer breakwater at Portland.
When considered in itself, a breakwater is the least showy of all human works. A ery little of the mass—rarely more than a fiftieth, if as much as that—shows above high-water mark. The sight-seer goes away disappointed, as he can scarcely realise the stupendous amount of material necessary to produce such an insignificant result. On land a diminutive excavation will last for years; in tho water, so potent are waves and storms, a titanic structure may be destroyed in a few hours. Even Cherbourg breakwater, if left unheeded, might vanish in a century, whilst the Pyramids have lasted through thousands of years.
TABLE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT BREAKWATERS.
Drtu of Chui ■ HH-nve-tUCllt,	Namt1 fif Place.	Length in Feet.	Material of which Constructed.	Shelter and flea to which it 1* ExjhikuJ.
1874	~	c a (^orth Galveston, L^aA. „ ’	I bon	9,700 20,777	Fascines	Gulf of Mexico.
1878	Charleston( U.S.A. [ ^’^ ’	I South	14,300 14,130	Fascines	Atlantic : sheltered.
1783 ’	Cherbourg, France	12,178	Rubble mound; masonry Super-	Channel: sheltered on W.
			structuro	and E.
1865	Port Said, Egypt { ? * ojr t East	9,800 6,233	Concrete blocks; masonry at head	Mcditerranea n *
1870	Alexandria, Egypt	9,675	Concrete blocks and rubble	Mcditerrau can.
1847	Holyhead, England	7,860	Hubble with masonry super-	Irish Channel: run of waves
			structure	90 miles.
1868	Buffahi, U.S.A.	7,600	Timber and stone (crib work)	Luka Erie,
1849	Portland, England J ^^	6,200 1,900	Rubble; no superstructure Rubble;masonry superstructure	Channel: sheltered On W„
1870	Chicago, U.S.A, (detached brk.-	5.432	Timber and stone (crib work)	Lake Michigan.
1812	Plymouth, England [water)	5,100	Rubble with atone pitching	Channel: shelter di on W.
				and E., but open to Atlantic on S.
				
1847	Alderney, Channel Islands	4,680	Rubble; masonry' superstructure	Channel: open to Atlantic
				on W.
1875	Colombo. Ccvion	4,200	Rubble; concrete superstructure	Indian Ocean: monsoons.
1860	Table Bay, South Africa	3,700	Rubble; no superstructure	South Atlantic Ocean: shd-
				tered on K, but open to W. and N.
				
1829	Delaware, U.S.A.	2)556	Rubble; no superstructure	Delaware Bay: sheltered
				on W., S., and N., open to Atlantic to N. W.
				
1847	Dover, England	2,100	Entirely masonry and concrete	Channel, 1
Digitized by u>ooole
524
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
/COO fat firm flw shat .
Alderney.
Plymouth.
OUT KN IR1AKWATIR
PORTLAXD.
RECTIONS OF FAMOUS BREAKWATERS.
(By kind pcrmiuion, from Mr. Ltraon F. Vernon-Harcourt't " Harbourt and Docke.")
Digitized by
Google
CHAPTER XXII.
“MAN THE LIFEBOAT!”
Early Lifeboats—Lukin's Boat—The South Shields Committee—Greathead's Boats—The Old Zetland—Sho Saves 400 Lives and is then Condemned for Firewood I—Lord Stratford de RedcliSe's Verses—The Wreck of the Ovington—Story of William Guy—A Reward Voted to Greathead—Apathy of the Government and of the Public—Formation of the Royal National Lifeboat Institution—Sir William Hillary — The Wreck of tho St. George Mail Steamer — A Two Hours’ Struggle — Accidents to Lifeboats—Beeching's Boats—The Requisites of a good Lifeboat—Buoyancy and Stability—How the Boat ia Launched—The Lifeboat Carriage—Steam Lifeboats—Equipment and Expenses—The Origin of Lifeboat Saturday—Rescue of the Zean-Zean'» Crew—Wreck of the Vex tea and Tragedy of the Laura Janet—Sorrow on the Shore—Mr. JIacara and Mr. Palmer—Tho First Lifeboat Saturday.
ABOUT the year 1784 there lived in Long Acre a coach-builder, Lionel ■1A. Lukin, by name. This honest man, knowing very little of the sea (he was born and had spent his youth at Dunmow, in Essex), but hearing much of the great number of lives lost upon it “by the oversetting and sinking of both sailing and rowing boats,” and being something of an inventor, gave up his spare time to the design of a boat which should be, as he called it, “un-immergible.” The Prince of Wales, afterwards George IV., not only encouraged his experiments, but offered to pay the expense of them.
So Lukin purchased a Norway yawl, and along the outer frame he added a projecting gunwale of cork, nine inches amidships and tapering off at bow and stern. Inside the boat he rigged a water-tight compartment reaching from the gunwale to the floor. The little vessel was found to float like a cork; so Lukin ballasted it with an iron keel to give it stability. Finally, ho fitted up two extra air-chambers—one in the bows, and the other in tho stern.
The boat was now tried again, and found to be indeed " unimmergible.” Lukin took out a patent for his invention on the 2nd of November, 1785, and the specification will be found in the third volume of the “Repertory of Arts.” He now had to press it upon the attention of the Admiralty and the Trinity House. With the usual experience of course. The red tape gentlemen would have nothing to do with it. They had never heard of a scientific attempt to save life at sea, and that was enough for them. A committee has
Digitized by
Google
526
THE STOEY OF THE SEA.
been defined as that which has neither a body to kick nor a soul to save. In spite of the Prince of Wales’s interest, only one lifeboat on Lukin’s plan was used, and this by a private gentleman, the Rev. Dr. Shairp, of Bamborough, who sent an ordinary fishing-coble to be altered on Lukin’s plan. During the first year of its new career this boat was the means of saving several lives. Lukin retired from business in 1824, and went to live at Hythe, in Kent, where, ten years after, he died. The inscription on his tomb in Hythe Churchyard says that he was the first to build a lifeboat
UES1Y OHEATH BAD.
(From th^ Engraving by Ridley.)
For five years the public remained apathetic. Then in the year 1789 a tremendous gale visited the eastern coasts of Great Britain. In running for the mouth of the Tyne, the Adventure, of Newcastle, missed the channel, and was driven violently on to the Herd Sand at the mouth of the river. Here she lay stranded and bumping heavily among tremendous waves. Her crew took refuge in the rigging. Only three hundred yards divided them from the shore: and the shore was crowded with thousands of spectators. Yet in the narrow interval the sea raged so furiously that no help could be given. Nobody could venture to put out in such open boats or
cobles as then existed. And so, one by one, the unhappy men dropped off the riggifg a11^ were lost, under the very eyes of the crowd.
Horrified by this scene, the inhabitants of South Shields formed a committee, and offered premiums for the best model of a lifeboat “calculated to brave the dangers of the sea, particularly of broken water.”
Many plans were submitted. Of these two were selected: one by Mr.
William Woodhave, the other by Mr. Henry Greathcad. Woodhave’s model (it is said) was suggested in the following curious way: A woman asked him to help her in lifting a pail of water on to her head. As he did so, he
noticed that she had a piece of a broken wooden dish lying in the water and floating with the points upwards. Turning the dish over several times, he found that it always righted itself; and he thus had presented to him the self-righting principle which he embodied in his boat, which was long known at Shields as “Woodhave’s cork boat.”
Digitized by LnOOQle
Digitized by
Google
LAUNCHING A N<<IIFO1J< LIFEBOAT: "HOLD HER UP I
9
Digitized by
Google
EARLY LIFEBOATS.
527
The novelty in Greathead’s model was the substitution of a curved, instead of a straight, keel; and he, as the only practical boat-builder who had competed, was given the premium and entrusted with the construction of the lifeboat; some of Woodhave’s suggestions with regard to the use of cork being incorporated. The cost of the boat was defrayed by a public subscription; and she was launched at South Shields in January, 1790, and christened the Original. Her dimensions were as follows:—Extreme length, 30 feet; length of keel, 20 feet; breadth of beam, 10 feet; depth of waist outside, 3| feet; depth inside to deck, 2} feet; stem and stern, each 5} feet high; sheer of gunwale, 30 inches. It was made to pull ten oars, double-banked, with iron thole-pins and grumuiets, and had a very raking stem and stern post 101 inches to 1 foot. The main keel measured 4 inches in depth, with a very considerable curvature, and three sliding keels. On each side, and running fore and aft, was a cork lining 12 inches thick, which reached from the deck to the thwarts; and outside was placed a “fender "of similar material, 4 inches wide and 21 feet in length, which, however, did not reach within 4| feet of either stem or stern. Nearly 7 cwt. of cork was used in the construction of this boat, which, of course, gave it great buoyancy.
Still Greathead's boat could not right herself if upset, and had no means of discharging any water that fell on board. Her chief peculiarities were the substitution of cork for the air-chambers which Lukin had used, and her curved keel.
From 1791 to 1797 this boat was the means of saving the whole or larger part of the crews of five ships. And yet no other lifeboat was built until 1798, when the then Duke of Northumberland ordered one to be built at his own expense, which in two years saved the crews of three vessels. Then in 1800 Mr. Cathcart Dempster commissioned Greathead to construct another for St Andrews. Here, on January 10th, 1803, this boat saved the crew of the Mean well, of Scarborough, numbering twelve hands. A furious gale was blowing at the time, and the fishermen of St Andrews, although entreated by the magistrates, refused to risk their lives; until three gentlemen—Mr. Dempster himself, Major Horsburgh, and Mr. David Stewart, a ship-master—bravely took charge of the lifeboat Then several fishermen volunteered, and their efforts were completely successful
Before the end of 1803 Greathead had built no less than thirty-one of these boats, eight of which were for foreign countries. And even now a few of Greathead’s lifeboats—exclusively rowing-boats—are to be found around the coast The oldest of all is still in the possession of the boatmen at Redcar, in Yorkshire. She arrived at Redcar on the 7th of October, 1802, where she was joyously christened the Zetland. For two years before she had been stationed at Spurn Point, at the mouth of the Humber. More than fifty years afterwards—by which time the old boat had saved some four hundred lives— the Royal National Lifeboat Institution took over the management of the
Digitized byVrOOQlC
528
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
Redcar station; and in 1864 the Zetland was superseded oy the Crossleys (presented by Messrs. Crossley & Sons, of Halifax). The old boat was condemned to be broken’ up for firewood I A jack-of-all-trades gathered together his iron chisels, big hammers, axes, etc., and was about to begin operations when some indignant spectators shouted, “Hold a bit' She’s as sound as iwer, and better than new ’uns.” Deputations were sent to interview the official, Captain Ward, and begged the old craft for Redcar fishermen, on condition that she was never to be employed against the National boats. The men of Redcar subscribed their half-crowns for their old friend. Lord
A COBLE,
Zetland and Squire Yeoman assisted. She was repaired at the cost of about a hundred pounds, restored to Redcar, and is now housed at the east end of the town.
When the old boat was condemned, in September, 1864, the late Viscount Stratford de Redcliffe, who was then staying at Upleatham, Lord Zetland’s country seat, wrote and dedicated the following lines to her:—
“ The lifeboat, oh I the lifeboat, we all have known so long, A refuge for the feeble, the glory of the strong; Twice thirty years have vanished since first upon the wave She housed the drowning sailor and snatched him from the grave.
*	•	*	*
“ The voices of the rescued—their numbers may be read— The tears of speechless feeling our wives and children shed, The memories of mercy in man’s extremcst need, All for the dear old lifeboat, uniting, seem to plead.
*	*	*	•
Digitized by Tooele
■TO THE RESCUE r
34
Digitized by GOOQle
530
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
“Thine age shall be respected, thy youth perchance restored, And sires and sons together.shall press thy heaving board; No fear that storms be wanting; and, call it old or new, "We’ll cheer the boat that’s foremost to save a sinking crew.™
Of the actual performances of the gallant Zetland we may here give a tale or two. They are mainly gathered from the recollections of " Jacky Stonehouse,” the oldest fisherman in Redcar. In his eighty-eighth year he could talk about tho wrecks of sixty or seventy years ago as if they had happened yesterday. Readers who prefer the old man’s yarns in all the vigour of dialect are referred to "The Book of the Lifeboat," edited and arranged by Messrs. J. C. Dibdin and John Ayling (Edinburgh: Oliphant, Anderson and Ferrier, 1894).
The first story relates to the wreck of the brig Ovington, of Newcastle, bound from London with a general cargo, valued at £40,000. She came ashore at Redcar, in a north-easterly gale, towards night, on the 14th of October, 1822. The whole of her crew was taken off by the help of a cable, but one youth died on reaching shore. “Old Jacky” tells the tale thus:—
" I know as well about it as if it was to-night. It was below Red Holes, and it was such a ship as never came to Redcar. Nobody expected—they wouldn’t credit it—that there was anybody alive on her, with the sea breaking over her as it was. I tell ye, there was no ship to see at all at times. They sees her coming down afore the sea, and she fetches up in the ‘Inner-heat’ It was rather grey, dusking in, and she dropped both her anchors, with eighty fathoms of chain. They cut the foremast away, and after that it took the mainmast oft* by the top. That was all the stick that was left. It was a sight for anybody to see; she drove right across the ‘Lead,’ both anchors dragging. Now, then, the night closes in, and they knew that she would come ashore, and there was ten fellows (they had five shillings apiece) to look for her. They know she would be ashore either in pieces or whole. Now, then, the drum went about for the lifeboat. Now, then, being a light cargo, she came right up, and so, as there was hardly water for the lifeboat, they takes a coble. Now, then, she was broadside on, and that broke the sea. They rose alongside, aud gets aboard, and finds a young chap, eighteen years old; and there was two women aboard. They gets this young man and puts him into the coble, and they takes him to the ‘Crown and Anchor,’ and he rolls over. He was alive, mind ye I and, for all that, he was starved (frozen) to death. Now, then, the doctor says when a man’s blood gets storken (stiffened) it’s all over with him. Now, see’st thou, I never seed such a shocking sight as those two women. They were up to the chin in water in the cabin. I never seed such a sight They had gone to London to meet their husbands, and were coming back as passengers to Sunderland. Now, see’st thou, there was two chaps from Marske, and they took their coats off aud lapped them round these two women, and they takes them away to the ‘Crown and Anchor.’ I never seed such a sight as they
Digitized by GOOQle
DEEDS OF THE OLD ZETLAND.
531
two poor women in my life. There was hundreds and hundreds of cheeses in that ship. She was six weeks, and men was employed in taking the cargo down the Tees, and shipping on board three sloops. The crew was all saved, barring that young chap that I told you about.”
We will now come to the only occasion on which the Zetland lost one of her brave crew. On Christmas Day, 1836, according to his tombstone in Redcar Churchyard, William Guy, pilot, in his forty-first year, was “ plunged into eternity whilst engaged, with others, in a brave but fruitless attempt to render assistance to the crew of a Danish vessel off Redcar.” The name of the vessel was the Caroline, brig, of Aalborg, bound from Shields with a cargo of coal. She carried a crew of ten men. Tire Zetland was manned by twenty-two— two men to each oar, George Robinson steering. The wind was blowing violently from EN.E., and drove the Caroline and the lifeboat hither and thither. The crew of the Caroline (in the end they were all lost) left the brig in two boats, and one came within what Guy thought easy distance for throwing a line. In doing so he was washed overboard, and at once lost to sight. The Zetland was smothered in the sea, and literally ran for some hundred yards under water. She was ultimately washed ashore between Redcar and Coatham. Nineteen out of twenty oars were dashed out of the men’s hands by the waves. This is how “ Jacky Stonehouse ” tells the story ;—
“ Aye I was there. Tommy Bilton was there, too, and he got what kept him in bed six months; he was never the same man after. She was a foreign brig, and she brake in pieces on the ‘ Gare' (banks at the Tees’ mouth), and came ashore in four pieces. What d’ye say ? How was Will Guy drownded ? Eh ■ bairn, it was an unseen job 1 It was such a thing as ye never heard of! It was of a Christmas Day. Now this Will Guy, he was a Methody, and he was in the Methody Chapel when somebody comes and tells him there was a ship coming on, and he gave his watch to a chap to hold for him. Now then, this ship was running in, and old Nanny Potts (what you’ll know her; she’s living in Redcar)—now then, old Nanny Potts had a glass, and she was looking out of window, and sho seed some men in the rigging, and they were all of a heap, as though they were consulting.
“ Now then, they gets their boat out; and after they gets her out they gets into her; and the ship was sometimes in the wind and sometimes full, and she was driving to the nor’ard. Now then, we puts the lifeboat in at West Scar Head, and rows off not far off. Now, some says they sees the boat in West Sear Head, and we goes for her. Now then, this was the job. Wo keeps driving away to the nor’ard, and then somebody says he sees a man in the boat with his arms round the thwart. Now mind, the lifeboat was driving in the sea, and the sea was mountains high. Why then, we got that nigh to her that we weren't more than a coble’s long mast length away from her. Now, mind what I’m saying to you! Old Slater Potts had hold of one steering oar and George Robinson of the other, and the men that was rowing
Digitized by Google
532
THE BTORY OF THE SEA.
their backs to the sea. It was an unseen job, was this. Now, Will Guy, he was bowman, and he had the boat-hook in his hand, and he says, ‘ Where is I to take hold of him?’ And George Robinson says, ‘Get it into his clothes, or any way thou can.’ Now, seest thou, a great sea came, like p mountain, and we puts her face to it Why, then, it never breaks; and she takes this sea and she sets off and runs with it, and she^ runs right to the shore—she ran right under the water; they couldn’t see her from the shore; she was buried in the sea! Now then, but it was an unseen job.
UDI AMD END ELEVATIONS AND FLAN 07 LIFEBOAT-CAKHLAOE.
"This sea that the lifeboat took tossed Will Guy right out of her. Will Smith, he jumps up and clicks hold on a coil of rope and flings it over to him; and after we gets inside the sea we hauls this rope in, expecting Will Guy would have hold of it. But there was nowt on! Now then, he was found He was six weeks in the water. I had a sister, Marget, living at Steers (Staithes); she was married there; and there was a young lass goes to Sandy Wyke one day. Now then, this young lass, she goes to Sandy Wyke, and there she found a drownded man in the place; and she came back and told them at Steers that there was a drownded man at Sandy Wyke. And my sister, she sees them bringing him along, and she looks at his face and she says, ‘ If that isn’t Will Guy, I never seed him in my life 1 ’ And she sent word by the horse-post to Redcar, and he was brought to Redcar and buried
Digitized by
Google
GREATHEAD IS REWARDED.
533
in the churchyard. And the Guys said they would never forget Marget Stonehouse for telling them that Will Guy was found at Sandy Wyke. If she hadn't sent word, he would have been buried in Hinnerwell Churchyard (Hinderwell, near Staithes), and his folk would never have known.”
It is time to turn from the Zetland to her inventor. In the beginning of 1802, when two hundred lives had been saved at the entrance of the Tyne
Photo. Goodman & Schmidt, Margate.
A FULLY EQUIPPED LIFEBOAT (THE QVTTBB No. 1. BAMBGATB STATION).
alone, Mr. Greathead thought himself entitled to some national reward, and applied to Parliament for it. Possibly it is more remarkable that he obtained it A committee of the House of Commons reported on the great value of his invention, and he was voted the sum of £1,200. To this the Trinity House and Lloyd’s added a hundred guineas each, and the Society of Arts a gold medal and fifty guineas, while a valuable diamond ring was presented by the Emperor of Russia.
After this, it might have been reasonably supposed that the lifeboat had become a recognised and public necessity. Not a bit of it! For years no advance was made; there was no public society to supply lifeboats, and the
Digitized by GOOQle
534
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
COLONEL BLR WILLIAM HILLARY, BART.
X^roM tAe Pdfnltnj in the ptMrMlon of the Koya! 5r<tf tonal Liftboat inrtUution.)
Government took no steps. Year by year, until 1823, the scenes of wreck and death which had called the lifeboat into existence still went on. Then a man arose who compelled the public conscience to face the iniquity of this negligence. This was Sir William Hillary, who then lived above the beautiful Bay of Douglas, in the Isle of Man, where the Tower of Refuge that he built still stands for a memorial. Towards the centre of the bay, and half a mile from his windows, lay the Conister reef, on which many a good ship had been wrecked beneath his eyes. These terrible spectacles moved him to take public action. In February, 1823, he addressed an appeal to the country. A warm response was made; and among those who took up the cause with heart and soul were Mr. Thomas Wilson, M.P. for the City of London, and Mr. George Hibbert, a West India merchant and M.P. for Seaford—for Seaford, where, in the evening of December 5th, 1809, no less than seven vessels went ashore together and were wrecked, with hideous loss of life.
Through the great influence of these gentlemen, a public meeting was convened at the London Tavern on the 4th of March, 1824 Dr. Manners Sutton, Archbishop of Canterbury, presided; and at this meeting was founded that noble society, the Royal National Lifeboat Institution.
The receipts of the Institution for the first year of its existence were £9,800
odd. The committee, in their first report, were able to state that they had built and stationed twelve lifeboats; while, doubtless from their good example, thirty-nine lifeboats had been stationed on our shores by private persons and small local societies. In those days the Institution used to assist local bodies to place lifeboats on the coast, such being independent of its control In their second annual report, the committee were able to show that the Institution had helped to save 342 lives from shipwreck, cither by its only life-saving apparatus, or by other means, for which it had granted rewards. And yet its total revenue for the second year had dropped to £3,392 7s. 5d. For fifteen years afterwards the annual receipts went on shrinking.
Whoever was responsible for this, it was not Sir William Hillary. As soon as he returned to the Isle of Man, he organised a life-saving crew of Douglas fishermen ; nor did he content himself with talking or subscribing, but took the tiller himself, and between the years 1825 and 1832 he was personally
Digitized by LnOOQle
SIR W. HILLARY AND THE ST. GEORGE.
535
active in saving many lives. It was, indeed, high time that somebody should set to work. Between the years 1821 and 1846 no fewer than 144 wrecks took place off the Isle of Man, and 172 lives were lost; while the value of property lost reached a quarter of a million sterling.
In 1825, when the City of Glasgow (steamer) was stranded in Douglas Bay, Sir William helped to save the lives of sixty-two persons; and in the same year eleven men from the brig Leopard, and nine from the sloop Fancy, which became a total wreck But’ his greatest success—the rescue of the crew of the St. George in 1830—is worth telling at length.
On Friday evening, the 29th of November, 1830, the St. George, a first-class mail steamer, commanded by Lieutenant Tudor, R.N., arrived at Douglas, Isle of Man, with the mail from Liverpool, and cast anchor in the bay. The night was dirty, with squalls from the south-west. Towards morning the wind had veered round to the south-east, and it rose to a furious gale, blowing directly in. About 5 A.M. the chain cable of the St. George parted, and she began to drive in between the Pollock and St. Mary’s (or Conister), two dangerous rocks under her lec. Steam had been kept up all night with the men at their stations; but the St. George had not sea-room sufficient for fighting oft destruction. In attempting to back her out, she struck violently upon St Mary's, and at once filled and settled down forward, with her head to the land, lying nearly broadside to the roughest part of that fatal rock.
Lieutenant Tudor promptly gave orders to cut away the foremast. He did this to lighten' the ship, and also with some notion of building a raft, on which his people might gain the rock. To be sure, St. Mary's is covered at high water: but he hoped that when day dawned, and their situation was perceived, they might be rescued off the Ice side by boats from the shore. He also sent up signals of distress.
News of the St. George's plight being carried to Sir William Hillary, ho hurried down to the pier, and in marvellously quick time had put off in the lifeboat, accompanied by Lieutenant Robert Robinson, RN., Mr. William Corlett (agent to the St. George's Packet Company), his coxswain (Isaac Vondy), and a volunteer crew of fourteen boatmen. On nearing the St. George, the anchor of the lifeboat was let go to windward, and by veering down upon the wreck, an attempt was made to take the people off from the weather-quarter; but the surf was so violent that nothing could be done by
this plan.
It was, therefore, resolved, at all hazards, to back the boat in
between the St. George and the rocks. Seeing their determination, and believing it meant almost certain destruction for them, Lieutenant Tudor kfglpd them to desist, and leave him to his fate. But they persevered, and at length, with infinite trouble, got the boat inside. Here the sea rolled so heavily that twenty times a minute the boat was in danger of being crushed to pieces. Her rudder was beaten off, six of her ten oars broken or lost, some of her air-tight cases stove, and her upper works battered, and Sir William Hillary,
Digitized by Google
536
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
Mr. Corlett, and two boatmen washed overboard. Mr. Corlett and the two men
were quickly hauled back into the boat; but Sir William (who could not swim) providentially grasped the rope that hung from the St. George's side, by yhich he supported himself in the waves until Lieutenant Tudor, with the help of Lieutenant Robinson (who had with great difficulty gained the wreck), got him also on board, with six of his ribs broken.
The boat being partly disabled and her oars lost, it now became impossible to take off the people and extricate themselves by hauling the heavily-laden
boat up to her anchor to windward. AU passage to leeward was obstructed by the rigging of the mast, which had been cut away.
DOUGLAB HARBOUR.
Thus for nearly two hours, hemmed in between the wreck and the rock, and tossing in a gigantic swell, the crews of the St. George and the lifeboat remained in deadly peril At length, by much labour and hazard, the men using their knives and an axe which had been carried in the boat, the rigging of the fallen mast was cut away; not a minute too soon, for, as the tide rose, every sea made a clean breach over the St. George, and almost buried the lifeboat. The crew of the steamer consisted of twenty-two persons. These were all got into the boat, making, with their rescuers, a total of forty. The water was baled out, the remaining oars manned, the boat cast off, and the cable veered away. She struck heavily on a low ridge of the reef, filled, struck again, and was at length, by the violence of the breakers, washed clear, the people aU this while holding
Digitized by Google
A TWO HOUKS’ STRUGGLE.
537
on by ropes. The cable was then cut, and the sea, washing round the bows of the St. George, drove the boat broadside on upon the sheltered side of St. Mary’s, shipwrecked and rescuers being thus, through a merciful providence, delivered out of the awful peril with which they had fought so long.
A minute or so was spent in baling, and they then proceeded for the shore.
“ THg waarxG was cvt away ” (p. 538).
about a quarter of a mile distant They were met by two boats which had put off and approached them under shelter of the rock. One boat relieved them of some of the people; the other, brought out by Lieutenant Sleigh, R.N., threw out a line to the lifeboat, and towed her in towards the beach, which she reached in a shattered condition, but saving all her crew. The steamer went to pieces where she struck—a loss to the owners of £12,000.
For this gallant service the Shipwreck Institution awarded a gold medal each to Sir William Hillary and Lieutenant Robinson; a silver medal each to
Digitized by GOOQle
538
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
Mr. Corlett and Isaac Vondy, coxswain; and twenty guineas to the boat’s crew. The St. George's Packet Company also gave the crew fifty pounds.
This experience did not affect Sir William’s zeal He continued to plead with his countrymen as earnestly as ever; and about the year 1826 his enthusiasm was caught up by Mr. George Palmer, M.P. for the southern division of Essex This gentleman—for many years the inspiring spirit of the Institution—introduced a plan for fitting lifeboats which was adopted and remained in use until 1852. Still the finances of the society were at a low ebb, and Palmer’s boats, though they did incalculable service, began to betray many defects. Between 1841 and 1850 the Institution had made no appeal to the public. More than this, in the same period it had lost three lifeboats, and this was the smallest part of the loss. In October, 1841, one of the boats at Blythe, Northumberland, was being pulled against a strong wind when a heavy sea struck her, causing her to run stern under, and half filling her with water. A second sea struck her, and she capsized. Ten men were drowned. Again, in February, 1843, at Robin Hood’s Bay, on the coast of Yorkshire, a lifeboat went off to the assistance of a stranded vessel, the Ann of London, during a fresh northerly gale. The lifeboat had got alongside the wreck, and was taking the crew off, when, as far as can be understood, several men jumped into her just as a great wave struck her, and she capsized. Many of the crew got on her bottom, while three remained underneath her; and in this state she drifted towards the shore on the opposite side of the bay. Witnessing tho accident, five gallant fellows launched a boat from the shore and tried to pull off to the rescue; the boat had hardly encountered two seas when she was turned end over end, two of her crew being drowned. An officer of the coastguard and eleven men lost their lives on this occasion; a few were saved, coming to shore safely on the bottom of the lifeboat, and even under it, in its reversed position.
These accidents were bad enough; but a worse one occurred in December, 1849. The South Shields lifeboat had gone out with twenty-four experienced pilots to the aid of the Betey, of Littlehampton, stranded on the Herd Sand. She had reached the wreck, and was lying alongside, though badly secured. The shipwrecked men were about to climb down into the boat when a heavy sea, recoiling from the bows of the vessel, lifted her on end, and a second sea, following quickly, threw her completely over. She ultimately drifted ashore. Twenty out of the twenty-four were drowned. On seeing what had happened, two other lifeboats at once dashed off and saved four of the pilots and the crew of the Betty.
The fortunes of the Lifeboat Institution were just then at their lowest ebb. But this disaster awoke the public conscience again, and caused the year 1850 to mark an epoch in the history of lifeboats. In that year the Institution was thoroughly reorganised. It was arranged that the boat should be inspected from time to time by qualified officers, and that payment on a fixed scale (to
Digitized byGOOQle
QUALITIES OF A GOOD LIFEBOAT.
539
be mentioned by-and-by) should be made to the coxswains and crews. The Duke of Northumberland offered a prize of one hundred guineas for the best model of a lifeboat, and a like sum towards constructing a boat on that model No less than two hundred and eighty plans and models were sent in, not merely from all parts of the United Kingdom, but from France, Holland, Germany, and the United States. After spending some six months in considering these carefully, the committee awarded the prize to Mr, James Beeching, of Great Yarmouth. This gentleman built several boats soon afterwards, and was the first to make the lifeboat thoroughly "self-righting,” and to the present day lifeboats are built on the principle laid down by him, with some modification.
Let us consider now the qualifications that a lifeboat ought to possess, and the various means taken to supply them.
In the first place, a lifeboat should possess an excess or extra amount of buoyancy.
Secondly, she should have great lateral stability to prevent her oversetting sideways.
Thirdly, she should be built so as to right herself if upset.
Fourthly, she should be able to get rid at once of any water that breaks into her.
Fifthly, she must be fast in a heavy sea.
Sixthly, she must be easily launched and taken on shore.
Seventhly, she must be strong.
Eighthly, she should have stowage room for a large number of passengers, besides her crew.
Now, in the first place, how shall we get buoyancy ? How (for it comes to this) are we to enable her to carry her passengers and crew while nearly full of water, without becoming so deeply immersed as to be unmanageable ?
For this we have to go back to Lukins' water-tight compartments. Most of the lifeboats now stationed round our coasts have a number of water-tight compartments, or air-cases, which, being disposed along the sides and at both ends, have the great advantage of confining all water taken on board to the centre of the boat, thus minimising the danger from this source of upsetting. The water is even thus rendered available as ballast, and increases the stability of the boat
Now for the question of lateral stability, which means resistance to oversetting sideways. We can get this stability in one or other of three ways: by great breadth of beam ; by filling the interior with air cases, so that no water can accumulate except at the centre, where it is (as we have seen) least harmful; and, lastly, by ballast.
But though each of these methods has much merit, in applying them we are limited by the other necessary qualifications of a lifeboat. For instance, if we make our boat very broad in the beam, we make her heavy, and lose
Digitized by GOOQle
540
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
the valuable quality of speed. Also if a very broad boat capsizes, it is more difficult for her to right herself than for one of narrower beam. Again, if we secure stability by filling up the boat with air-tight compartments we diminish stowage-room for passengers and crew, and so interfere with the eighth requirement
We come, then, to ballast This may be solid, or the sea may be admitted.
LIFEBOAT UNDEB BAIL.
through tubes or holes in the boat to furnish it. The most ordinary form of solid ballast is a heavy iron keel; and as this occupies the lowest possible position in the boat, it there exercises the most powerful leverage. The weight of the keel will depend, of course, on the size of the boat, and may range from three to close on twenty hundredweight.
In self-righting boats belonging to the National Lifeboat Institution, ballast is obtained by wood and cork of nearly equal weight to the iron keel, enclosed in air-tight cases. If it strikes the reader as odd that light buoyant substances such as wood and cork should be used os ballast, he will kindly remember the old conundrum, " Which is the heavier—a pound of lead or a pound of
Digitized by^OOQlC
Digitized by GOOQle
542	THE STORY OF THE SEA.
feathers ? ” A pound of cork is just as heavy as a pound of iron; and as ballast it has this great advantage over iron that, if the bottom of the boat should by any chance be stove in, the cork which has hitherto been giving weight to the boat now gives her buoyancy, and keeps her above water.
But here, again, we are brought face to face with our sixth requirement. (Every boat that has been launched since the beginning of the world has been a compromise between different requirements.) She must, we said, be easy to launch. But all this amount of ordinary ballast makes the land conveyance of lifeboats a very heavy and troublesome business. For this reason water ballast is sometimes used, as it can be discharged or taken on board as required.	Most boats contain tanks specially made to hold this water-ballast.
But in the Norfolk and Suffolk boats it is usually unconfined. Nor is it as dangerous as one might suppose to have this quantity of water loose inside a boat—that is, in a sailing-boat. In the case of a rowing-boat there are several objections to it; among them this, that the crew would have to sit with their feet in the water, which, during long hours of exposure in severe weather, could hardly be good for their health. Of course, it is anything but desirable to carry all the water which is cast on board by the spray in breakers; and to remove this easily and effectively a plan was invented of passing it down through pipes by its own gravity to the level of the sea ' outside. There are usually six of these relieving tubes, arranged in threes on opposite sides of the floor or deck. In the older lifeboats these tubes were open, and consequently the water of the sea underneath the keel frequently shot up through them, to the discomfort of the rowers. But in more modern boats a self-acting valve has been introduced, at once ingenious and simple. This is just a plate accurately fitting a tube at the upper end, and made to turn on an axis a little on one side of its centre; this plate is so balanced as to keep shut of itself, and under the pressure of water from below it closes still more tightly, but the slightest pressure from above causes it to revolve on its axis. Thus, the weight of the water shipped weighing more heavily on the larger division of the plate than on the smaller, heels it over, the tube is opened, and the water pours out.
How, next, are we to get our boat from the shed to the sea and launch her ?
Nearly every lifeboat, except a few of the largest size, is provided with a carriage, on which she rests in the boathouse, ready for every emergency. By means of this transporting carriage the boat is rendered useful over a greater extent of coast than she otherwise would be; and even when launched from abreast of the boathouse she can be got into the sea with far less trouble by the aid of a carriage than without it. But it is in launching a boat on a flat, exposed beach that its service is most obvious. The surf here thunders in far ahead of navigable water, and to drag the boat through the rollers would be next door to impossible. But with a carriage this difficulty disappears.
It usually consists of two parts—a fore and main body. The latter is
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE CARRIAGE.
543
formed of a keelway and of bilgeways attached to it, and resting on the main axle, the boat’s weight being entirely on the rollers of the keelway. The boat is first of all drawn down to the water’s edge. There the carriage is turned round, so that the hind part faces the seo. The crew now climb into the boat and take their places, each man seizing his oar and holding it ready for instant use; the coxswain places himself at the helm.
All being ready, the carriage is carefully backed until water deep enough to float the boat is reached. The coxswain, who has been eagerly on the watch for this, gives the word; the keel way is tilted up, and down this inclined plane the lifeboat shoots into the water, with her bow facing the surf. Before her stern has well cleared the carriage the crew have bent to their oars, and the boat is at once under control and speeding swiftly on her errand.
Now for the means of propelling the lifeboat. In the larger boats sails are used; but as the greater number of boats owned by the National Lifeboat Institution are of moderate size, the oar is chiefly relied on. Much ingenuity has been spent in designing other means of propulsion—as, for instance, paddles worked from inside the boat by a winch. But those who man the lifeboat are familiar with the oar; they have used it all their lives, and in all kinds of weather; it is like a limb to them ; and they place more confidence in it than in any mechanical contrivance, which might get out of order at a critical moment, and of which, at any rate, they have no experience.
But in 1890 a great advance was made, when the first steam lifeboat, the Duke of Northumberland, was built by Messrs. R. and H. Green, of Black wall Yard, and named after the President of the Institution. She was placed at New Brighton, and on January 27th, 1894, conclusively proved her merits. At about half-past eight in the morning word came to New Brighton that a vessel had gone ashore on Taylor’s Bank The crew was mustered, Captain William Martin took the helm, and they started about 9 o'clock for the wreck, which was near the Formby lightship, about eight miles oft A correspondent of the Sunday Chronicle afterwards had an interview with Captain Martin, who gave the following account of the rescue:— .
There was a strong wind blowing, and the sea was very rough, with a lot of broken water about the shallow sandbanks which are at the mouth of the Mersey. Upon approaching the wreck they saw the Liverpool boat and the tug. Captain Martin made a bee-line for the wreck, straight across the bank, through the rough and broken water. She was lying with her nose to the land; consequently there was no lee under which to shelter. They made fast with a line, and with some little difficulty got the shipwrecked crew safely into the lifeboat.
“ So you saved them all ?" asked the correspondent.
“ A crew of six were there and a dog," added Captain Martin, with a smile. “Don't forget the dog.” They then steamed back to New Brighton, and the crew of the Maria Lamb were sent on to Liverpool.
Digitized by LnOOQle
544
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
Captain Martin speaks with enthusiasm of the behaviour of the DvJce of Northumberland. This was the first time she had been engaged in actual service, and she fulfilled every expectation.
‘'Steam lifeboats,” he said, “must be the boats of the future. We can go straight for anything with steam, and not waste time beating about for a position to run down. Suppose you miss your mark with a sailing-boat, you have all the ground to go over again; whereas with a steamboat all that is
DBCK FLAM
Showing CroaB’MCtjOUB at variauH distancea from stem to stertL
A. Uncovered part of deck. lk Relieving Tubed, c. Bide Aircaaet «bove deck, Db End Air-ewes-s, VentfUtiDg-BcutUes.
f. Water Btritait-tauka.
o* Plugs,
H, Pumps of BdlEut-taukH.
MIDSHIP PLAN,
saved. What we want here is a boat with a smaller draught, so that we can go over the shallow banks. Our present draught is about four feet, but with a smaller draught we could go anywhere.
“ You might add,” said an old lifeboatman who stood by, “ that not half tho coxswains in the country would have done what Bill Martin here has done —and that is, run straight across a bank with a heavy sea on, and through water with only a foot of water under his keel I have been out seventeen times, and I know something.”
The correspondent concurred, and, congratulating Captain Martin on the successful appearance of the Duke, bade him good-bye.
Digitized by
Google
STEAM LIFEBOATS.
545
The experiment of the Duke of Northumber-la nd having proved so successful, a second steam lifeboat—the City of Glasgow — was added to the Institution’s fleet. Except for one foot more beam, she closely resembles her predecessor in shape. Her machinery, however (designed
NTBAX LI EE BOAT BUILT FOK THE ROYAL NATIONAL LIFEBOAT INSTITUTION.
by Messrs, Penn), is totally different, and enables her to
propel herself sideways, as well as forward and back. The advantage of this ,
“lateral propulsion” is evident when we consider that one of the greatest difficulties in lifeboat service is to prevent the lifeboat being dashed to pieces
against the side of the vessel she is assisting. The new lifeboat is a gift to the Institution of the people of Glasgow, the greater part of the cost having been raised there on Lifeboat Saturday, 1893. For, the present she will be stationed at Harwich,
A few words now on the gear and equipment of a lifeboat.
She will be well stored with lines, called " lifo-lines,” Some of these she carries festooned along her sides, so as to be easily grasped by persons
THS LAST SURVIVOR.
35
Digitized by GOOQle
546
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
struggling in the water; others, with corks attached, are cast loose as soon as the boat arrives alongside a wreck, and float all round her. She also carries a cork life-buoy, which is thrown at the end of a line to anyone struggling or swimming in the water. She must also have grappling-irons attached to strong life-ropes, so that, when Hung on board or into the rigging of a wreck, they will take firm hold. Besides these, there are anchor and cable, a lantern, a compass, a drogue (a canvas bag which is towed behind the boat and prevents her from broaching-to when running before a heavy sea), and several articles, such as axes, life-belts for the crew, etc.
Even the design of these life-belts has been a matter of great care. A life-belt must be strong and durable. It must have sufficient buoyancy (from twenty-five to twenty-eight pounds) to support a man, heavily clothed, with his head and shoulders above the water, or to enable hiui to support another person besides himself, and it must be flexible, and conform to the shape of the wearer. To give this flexibility, the life-belt is divided into two zones of cork—an upper and a lower—so that between the two it can be secured tightly around the waist. In no other way can it be confined sufficiently close and secure around the body without pressing on the chest and ribs, and impeding the man’s breathing, as well as the free play of his arms.
Altogether, a lifeboat and her equipment (including the carriage) will cost about £700. and a boathouse perhaps £350 more. Sometimes, too, a slipway must be built for launching her, and this may cost anything from £200 to £1,000.
The average annual expense.of keeping up a lifeboat station is £100. Each boat has its appointed coxswain at £8 and an assistant at £2 a year. Besides these, the crow consists of a bowman (who is paid 30s. a year) and as many boatmen as the boat pulls oars. Every time they go afloat to save life the coxswain and crew receive (whether successful or not) 10s. o ach if by day, and £1 if by night. Also they are usually paid 4s. each every time the boat is launched for exercise. These payments are increased by one-half during the six months from the 1st of October to the 31st of March. A signalman also is appointed, with a retaining fee of £1 a year, and a reward of 7s. is given to the man who brings first news of a wreck in such a position as to be out of sight of the coastguard on duty or responsible look-out man. The members of the volunteer crew are registered, and, wherever possible, at least double the men required are entered on the register.
Wo have still to tell of the latest and most fortunate development of this great charity—the institution of Lifeboat Saturday, which, like everything else that is cheerful in the history of the lifeboat, had its origin in a great disaster.
Mr. Charles W. Macara, the founder of the movement, was engaged in the
Digitized by LnOOQle
HOW LIFEBOAT SATURDAY WAS STARTED.
547
management of a large mercantile and manufacturing business in Manchester. His health being affected by overwork, he was advised to have a seaside residence, and chose a little-known watering-place on the Lancashire coast— St Anne’s-on-the-Sea—which had the advantage of being within easy access of his place of business. Naturally fond of the sea, he soon began to interest himself in the fishermen and their pursuits; among the rest, in the work done by the local lifeboats. Of the importance of that work he was continually reminded by the remains of wrecked vessels in the estuary of the Ribblo visible from the windows of his house. His first experience of lifeboat work was in the beginning of December, 1886, when one stormy afternoon a small object was descried through the glass, which turned out to be tho mast of a ship with men clinging to it, five miles away on tho Salthouse Bank. Tlie lifeboat at once put out in a stormy north-west wind, and returned in the evening, bringing with her five shipwrecked and exhausted men — the whole crew of the Zenn-Zean, a small steamer, from the
.	A LIFEBOAT HOUSE.
port of Montrose.
Now, it so happened that an hour or two later an amateur concert was to be given in aid of the funds of the Royal National Lifeboat Institution, and in the middle of the entertainment the lifeboat crew entered the room, bringing with them the five men they had rescued. The scene is thus described in Messrs. Dibdin and Ayling’s “ Book of the Lifeboat ”:—“ The poor fellows had been well cared for, but there was a dazed look on their faces, expressive of the terror and suffering so recently undergone. The master of the lost vessel (a Scotchman) ascended the platform anil told the audience the story of the wreck and rescue. He commenced his remarks by saying that, instead of being there that night, he expected to have been in eternity, and he expressed his gratitude to God for the deliverance vouchsafed to himself and his crew. Then he went on to tell of the terrible position he and his men had been in, as they clung to the mast with tho waves breaking over them from a rising tide. He told of their hopes and fears; and how, when their situation had become known, and they saw the lifeboat corning, they doubted if it was possible to hold on until her arrival His position was at
Digitized by
Google
548
THE STOEY OF THE SEA.
the bottom of the mast, and as each sea went over him it was with the greatest difficulty that he could hold his breath until the wave had passed. The engineer, who was at the top of the roast, was in an equally precarious condition, for he was benumbed with cold, and constantly called out to the master that he could hardly hold on. It is unnecessary to say that the story, told under the circumstances and with so much feeling, produced a great impression upon the audience. After the concert, Mr. Macara invited the coxswain and sub-coxswain of the lifeboat to his house, and induced them to describe the rescue, in their own words, to the Manchester press by telephone. Mr. Macara says he can well remember what intense pleasure this
“ THERE SHE tS I
new experience gave to the men, and how elated they were with their afternoon’s work, remarking that there had not been a wreck for a considerable time, but it seldom occurred that there was one without there being more.
Only five nights later this prophecy was terribly fulfilled. In a heavy December gale the ship Mexico, of Hamburg, bound for Liverpool, drove helplessly upon a sandbank between Southport and Formby. Her crew, finding the water breaking over them, sent up signals of distress, and were answered from three parts of the coast. Three lifeboats—those of Southport, Lytham, and St Anne’s—put out to the rescue. At St Anne’s, as soon as the Mexico’s signals were seen, rockets were sent up to summon the crew (thirteen in number), who were scattered along the coast as far as Lytham. The lifeboat Laura Janet, was run out from the house, and when the time came to embark it was found that eight of the crew were in their places. Four volunteers climbed into the seats of the absent men, and at the last moment William Johnson, the coxswain, drove up hastily from a distance, and took his place
Digitized by Google
THE LA UH A J ASET SETS OUT.
549
at the tiller. Among the volunteers was the Scotch captain who had been rescued from the Zean-Zean, but his services were not needed, and he was not allowed to go. The men, remembering their recent success, were in high spirits, though it is said that the sub-coxswain, a fisherman of known bravery, looked graver than usual as he took his seat The boat was launched skilfully and as she went through the surf a cheer followed her from the small crowd
HURT.
upon the beach. For some time the light which she carried was visible, showing that she made good headway against the sea; but soon the last gleam was lost in howling darkness. The folk on shore waited anxiously for its return. The boat had started at half-past ten. At half-past eleven a light was	seen, which	was supposed to come from another vessel in	distress
Later on	other lights	were visible.	But these, too, faded, and tho	lifeboat
did not return.
ifany	people in St.	Anne’s spent	that night upon the shore, though	all they
could see	of wreck or	rescuers was	an occasional rocket Morning broke, and
Digitized by Tooele
550
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
in the grey dawn there was no sign of the lifeboat. Word went round that she must have put into some other port. The womenkind, having so ' recently heard of the wonders of the telephone, flocked to Mr. Macara’s house to inquire if any news had been received of their husbands and sons. At length, through the telephone there came word that the bodies of some of the lifeboat men had been washed up on the opposite shore.
A little later, a lifeboat, which was recognised as that of Lytham, was seen making her way to the shore. Before she could touch the land a horseman rode through the waves to meet her, and this is the message he brought back.
Of the three boats that had gone out, that of Lytham had returned without loss, bringing with her the rescued crew of the Mexico. The boats of Southport and St. Anne’s had both been capsized. Of the former, thirteen men had been lost out of a crew of fifteen. Of the Laura Janet, not a man would ever return.
There is no need to dwell upon the scene of lamentation among the widows and orphans on St. Anne's shore that morning. The Laura Janet was found floating not far from the wreck and brought back, and one by one the bodies of the drowned men were recovered, imd laid in the churchyards of St Anne’s and Lytham.
Such a catastrophe had never before occurred in the sixty-two years of the Institution’s existence. All England was moved by the news of it In little over a fortnight no less than £33,000 was collected, a sum more than sufficient to provide for the widows and orphans. William I., then German Emperor, sent £250 to be distributed by the German Consul, along with £1,400 from Hamburg, the port from which the Mexico hod sailed.
Money having been subscribed so plentifully, it was thought that something should also be done to perpetuate the memory of the men who had laid down their lives so nobly; and in May, 1887, a monument to them was unveiled on tho promenade at St. Anne’s. Upon a stone pedestal bearing the names of the thirteen drowned men there stands the figure of a lifeboatman wearing the features of tho dead coxswain. It was thus described by Mr. H. J. Palmer, editor of the Yorkshire Post and staunch friend of the lifeboat movement, in his “ Man the Lifeboat! ”—one of the strongest appeals ever written for a good cause:—
“On the wind-swept slope that faces the sandy shallows of the estuary of the Kibble, off St. Anne’s-on-the-Sea, stands one of the most pathetic memorials ever erected to British heroism. High upon a 1'ock pedestal is the rough figure of a stalwart lifeboatman, booted and belted as for such life-and-death work as three noble crews put out upon that deadly triangle of water and sand and reef to perform, or to perish in performing, on the night of December 9th, 1886. The silent figure looks straight out to sea, as though watching for a fresh task of fieri 1 upon the fatal Horse Bank, whose whirling flood swept over a score of comrades into the lower deeps at a swoop. In the tranquil summer days thousands of city folk, who never saw an angry sea, swarm over this vast marine tableland, to praise the ‘safety’ of its sands, as they paddle through the wavelets, and to prattle of the pretty curling crests of the ‘white horses’ that leap over the ridges which mark the ocean graves
Digitized by GOOQle
SORROW AT ST. ANNES.
551
of the bravest of British hearts. To do them justice, no adult loiterer among them looks up at the belted hero and reads the legend beneath without adding something to the little heap of casual coins that lie at the bottom of the pillar-box of the National Lifeboat Institution at the foot of the monument But the pity—nay, the scandal—of it is that some such dramatic memorial is needed to bring the claim of a great and unbought national service home to the inlander’s mind and heart, and that for the million who can afford a yearly mite to sustain it the statue of the lifeboat-man is as unknown and unregarded as it is for the children who play 1 tig ’ around its base. . . . The harvest of the sea hereabouts is not rich enough to maintain any extensive fishing fleet Two score families probably furnish the three crews. Yet, when six-and-twenty gaps were made in this little lifeboat force, six-and-twenty other fearless fellows were straightway found to fill them, to face the risks anew, and maintain the ancient honour of their race, their craft, and their coast-line, even though in many a case the laxly of a father or a brother lay but half a dozen fathoms below them as they bent themselves to a fresh effort of rescue. The name of Parkinson occurs twice in the list of those who perished in the attempt to save the German crew in December, 1?86. It occurs half a dozen times in the list of their successors. The National Lifeboat Service is ‘ supported by voluntary contributions.’ These stupendous sacrifices of fathers, husbands, brothers, are the ‘voluntary contributions’ which the humble homes of a stormy estuary make towards the maintenance of the noblest volunteer force in the world. And they are made without apj>eal and without a second call. When will the shillings and half-crowns of the ‘gentlemen of England who live at home in ease,’ which are so urgently needed to pay the mere routine charges, be forthcoming with half the readiness with which these gallant men tender their lives?
“ Evil is wrought by want of thought As well as want of heart.’’
Mr. Macara, who had been chairman of the St Anne’s Lifeboat Disaster Committee, and afterwards of the St. Anne’s branch of the Institution, had meanwhile been making a study of the finances of the life-saving service. On looking into the annual report for 1890, he found that the total income amounted to a little over £42,000, while the expenditure during that year had been nearly £76,000—a deficit of close on £33,000. Moreover, he found, on looking a little closer, that the income of this great national society had for many years been made up by the contributions of a yearly average of one hundred persons only. Upon these discoveries ho addressed a letter to the press of the country; and it was this letter that led to Mr. Palmer’s magnificent appeal. The Yorkshire Post opened a subscription list and collected £3,500 in a little over a fortnight, and Sir William C. Leng, of the Sheffield Daily Telegraph, raised a further sum of about £1,400.
But Mr. Macara did not stop here. A month later (August, 1891) he called upon the Mayors of Manchester and Salford and on the leading men in every line of business, and suggested that a council should be formed to promote a Lifeboat Saturday Collection, in order to bring the needs of the society vividly home to the sympathies of all classes. They readily agreed, having been already interested by reading the press notices. Committees were formed, bills posted, pamphlets, tracts, subscription forms, and collecting boxes distributed. On the Thursday and Friday two lifeboats and crews were paraded through Manchester, Salford, and the suburbs, each headed by a
Digitized by GOOQle
552
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
band. On Lifeboat Saturday a grand procession was formed, consisting of two boats, three bands, the Fire Brigade, and Ambulance Corps, representing the mode of saving life on land as well as water. This procession moved through enormous crowds to the Belle Vue Gardens, where the boats were launched, both morning and afternoon, in an artificial lake, and an exhibition given of saving life by means of the rocket apparatus, in the presence of 30,000 spectator. Collectors accompanied these processions each day, and large collecting boxes were placed in the main streets, at the railway stations, and in places of amusement. As a result, a total of £5,500 was raised, chiefly in small sums; and, after paying expenses, the committee handed over to the Manchester branch £4,600, to be sent up to the parent institution in London.
Other Lancashire and Yorkshire towns followed suit; and, whereas in 1890 these two counties had contributed about £3,000, their contributions in 1891 rose to £21,000, In 1892 the movement spread, Dundee leading the way in Scotland And the movement is spreading still. It seems likely that in a few years’ time Lifeboat Saturday will be an annual festival in every large town in the country.
Digitized by GOOQle
CHAPTER XXIII.
THE LIFEBOAT AT WORK.
A Great Tide—Origin of the Goodwin Sauds—Their Situation and their Deadliness—A Cockney Cricket-Match—-Wreck of the Prwidentia—The Ramsgate Lifeboat Goes Out—Four Lives to Save —The Captain Jumps Overboard—A Lifebelt is Flung—He Drifts Ont into the Night—The Second Man's Fate—The Third Man—A Gallant Wrestling Match—The Cabin-boy is Saved—And the Captain, After All—The Indian Chief—She Strikes on the Long Sand—The Chief Mate’s Story— The Bradford to the Rescue!—Her Crew Speak the Lightship—They Determine to Lie by All Night—The Survivors on the Fore-top—The Rescue—East Coast Boatmen—Robert Legerton—The Exploits of the Albert Edward—Charles Fish and his Record.
TT is recorded in the "Saxon Chronicle” that in the month of November, J- 1099, and on the first day of the new moon, there visited the south coast of England a high tide such as was never known before, nor has been since. It was this flood (tradition says) that buried the whole kingdom of Lyonesse, stretching between Land's End and the Scilly Isles, a kingdom reputed to have contained no less than 140 churches. The Seven Stones, where now the lightship rides, are said to mark the site of a large city; but the only part of that land which still rises well above tlie water is St. Michael’s Mount, then known as Carag-luz-en-kuz, the “ Grey Rock in the Wood.” The same tide swept up the Channel, and, as Stow has it in his " History of England,’’ 11 the sea brake in over the banks of the Thames and other rivers, drowning many towns and much people, with' innumerable of oxen and sheepe; at which time the lands in Kent, that sometime belonged to Duke Godwine, Earle of Kent, were covered with sandes and drowned, which are to this day called Godwyne Sandes.”
This is one account of the origin of the Goodwin Sands—once a pleasant island called “ Loraea ” (“ Insula Infera,” by the Romans), and inhabited by the great Earl Godwin, the Kentish firebrand. Another legend has it that these lands were given to the See of Canterbury by William the Conqueror; but that the money and stones which should have been employed in repairing the sea wall were misappropriated to the building of Tenterden Church steeple, and the sea, in consequence, broke down the neglected barriers, and turned the rich meadows into the Sands as they now appear.
They start with the North Sand Head, almost abreast of Ramsgate, and stretch away south by west for some nine or ten miles, tho southern lightship being moored abreast of St. Margaret’s Bay, under the tall South Foreland.
Digitized byVrOOQlC
554
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
Deal stands almost opposite the centre of them. North of Deal, between them and the shore, runs the Gull passage, where the Gull lightship lies. Off Deal and to the south lie the famous Downs. In the middle of the Sands there is, at low water, a large lake, marked on the chart as Trinity Bay, but known to the boatmen as the In-Sand. You may row out towards this, and row over the sand banks that surround it as soon as the tide allows you. Now, you find yourself in completely smooth water, and arc safe; but for a very short while;. An hour or so, and a big surf begins to rage over the banks. At low water on a fine day, you may even land and walk about the Sands for awhile.
“I remember,” says Mr. Clark Russell, "once passing these Goodwins, and seeing a number of little black figures running about them. A pleasure vessel from one of the adjacent ports was lying at anchor a short distance off, and her, boat was against the slope of the shoal It was a very calm day, indeed, the sea just blurred here and there, with small draughts of air that gave the water in those places a look of ice, with a pallid streak of the French coast beyond the white mainsail of the pleasure-cutter, hove up by the refraction of the light above the sea-line. I brought a small pocket-telescope to bear, and observed that those little black figures running about like the savages Robinson Crusoe saw were Cockney excursionists, engaged in playing cricket. They played as if they wanted to be able to talk of having played rather than as if they enjoyed the game. Talk of contrasts' A man may bo rendered pensive by watching children sporting in a graveyard, by mingling in a festivity held upon a space of ground where once a famous battle w;is fought, and where the feet of the merrymakers are separated from the bones and skulls of warriors by a couple of spades’ length of earth. But to see those little block-coated creatures running about after a ball on top of such an ocean burialplace that the like of it—for the horror of its annals and for the number of those it has sepulchred—is not to be found in this habitable world, might well have made the gayest heart sad and thoughtful for a spell.”
For eight hundred years, then, the Goodwins have been the scene of constant wrecks, and may well say to any other shoal or headland in the world—
“ For ae man that ye droon
I droon twa.”
" Who can view the ’Goodwins without thinking of the treasures which lie buried in their heart, of the hundreds of ships which have gone to pieces upon them, of the thousands of human corpses which have floated out of their flashing surf to bo stranded upon some distant beach, or to drift, maybe for days, upon the bosom of the tides, looking up with blind faces to heaven through the green transparent lid of their sea coffin ? There is no spot that has ever been the theatre of wilder human suffering. Again and again as you sail past you see forking up out of them some black gibbet-like relic of a
Digitized by ; ooQle
ON THE GOODWINS.
555
wreck a week, a fortnight, a month old. Something of the kind is always visible. . . .”
From a thousand tales of horror let us choose one that illustrates how much a lifeboat can accomplish even on the Goodwins.
It is a black December night—as black “ as a wolf’s throat.” A large ship has just been reported ashore on the Goodwins. The harbour-master hurries down to Ramsgate pier-head; he and all with him can see nothing, and no signal has been sent up from the lightships. They cross-question the man who asserts that he has seen, during a lift in the fog, a vessel on the Sands. He sticks to his story. The harbour-master decides that he is right; and very soon the little Aid steam-tug (of whose feats whole volumes might be written) is fighting her way out, with the Ramsgate lifeboat in tow. After a few minutes’ battle with the tremendous seas, the two crews just discern through the mist a vessel looming—a complete wreck, her bows to the sea, her mizzen-mast gone by the deck, and the breakers running wild over her. In such rigging as remains no sailor can be seen. Have all on board perished ?
The crew of the lifeboat fear so; but they east loose from the Aid and pull towards the vessel, narrowly escaping the pieces of wreckage that are dashed about in the seaway. The vessel seems to be a large one, and must have carried some fifteen or sixteen hands aboard. But where are they ?
At last, crouching under shelter of the deck-house, three men and a boy are seen. These seem the only survivors, and they must have been crouching there for hours; yet so confident were they that a lifeboat would put out to their help that they had prepared a lifebuoy ready to throw overboard.
The lifeboatmen pulled steadily, watching their opportunities, and the boat comes up to her cable just under the vessel’s stern. The men on the wreck, to whom she comes as a reprieve from death, spring to their feet, and fling the lifebuoy and line; and, after a sharp struggle, it is secured and brought on board. All hands lay hold on the rope, and do their utmost to haul the boat closer to the wreck ; but the gale is at its height, and the tide, too, is against them. A tremendous sea comes rushing over the vessel, and fills the boat to her gunwales, knocking down five or six of the men and bruising some severely; but she lifts again. Fortunately, no one is lost
But what of the crew ? As the boatmen look, to their great surprise they see the captain spring up from under the lee of the deck-house, tear off his coat, throw it into the water, and then, jumping on the bulwarks, grasp tho hawser connecting with the lifeboat, and slide into the boiling sea I He tries to work himself along, but the waves toss him from side to side like a feather before the wind. At times ho is hidden in the depths; and, again, as a wave heaves up and the hawser stretches taut, he comes into view for a moment Will he reach the boat ? As they ask themselves the question, a whirl ot waters envelopes him, his grasp relaxes, and lie is swept off. When next he
Digitized by GOOQle
556
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
appears it is at some distance from the rope. He tries to swim to the lifeboat; the distance is but a few yards, but the sweep of sea and tide is against him, and it is all he can do to keep his head above water. The boatmen try all they' can to make the boat sheer towards him, but they cannot get near enough; and, in a few seconds, they see him swept by on the tide. Jarman, the coxswain of the boat, seizes a lifebuoy and throws it with all his might The wind catches it and helps the throw; he makes a spring forward and just reaches it With a gasp of relief, the crew see him put two hands upon one side, as if to get upon it; as he leans forward it falls over his head like a hoop ; he gets his arms through it, and shouts to the boatmen, “ All right I ” waving his hand as if
A WRECK ON THE GOODWINS.
(From a Drawing hy IF. L, Wyllie, A.R.A.)
beckoning them to follow, and so goes floating down the strong tide into the darkness. The lifeboat crew gaze after him till he vanishes. Follow him they cannot, with the tide to beat back against: and two men and a boy' are still aboard.
Even while they strain their eyes after the captain, a tremendous noise drowns the roar of the wind, and the mainmast comes crashing down across the port bulwarks. The men on board, thinking the end has come, give a loud cry. The chief mate rushes towards the starboard quarter, catches at the end of the mainbrace hanging there, seizes it round his waist, and throws himself over the side! He is a powerful swimmer; but, in a sea like this, he is dashed about like a chip, powerless to gain a yard, though but a few separate him from the hands held out to help ; and the lifeboatmen, pull as they will upon the hawser, cannot haul the boat a single foot towards him. While they’ strain and tug, the tragedy is acted out Again and again Jarman throws the lead-line;
Digitized by^OOQlC
"SO THE FIGHT GOES ON’’ (p. 3SQ
Digitized by LnOOQle
558 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
but the boat is pitching and tossing so wildly that every time he misses. The man’s cries pierce the thunder of the surge.
His strength fails now; he tries to clamber up the rope and back into the ship, but falls back—his arms and legs still tossing, but it is by the action of the waves ; his head droops and sinks ; with a last cry he disappears. From the bulwarks of the ship, with eyes distended by terror, the two survivors stare after him.
The deck-house, under which these two—the second mate and cabin-boy— have been crouching, is beginning to break up; and tho last remaining man throws himself upon tho hawser and attempts to reach the boat. Time after time the breakers rush over and smother him, but this fellow has stronger sinews; he does not loose his hold of the rope for an instant, and at last gains the bow of the plunging lifeboat But Nature can do no more; there, on the threshold of safety, he collapses, his jaw drops, and he seems about to swoon. But the man in the bow of the lifeboat has been watching his every movement, and now, with a shout to his mates, “Hold me! Hold on to me!” he throws himself prone on the raised fore-deck, and, with his body half stretched overboard, grasps the collar of the drowning man. But how will he get back ? For the sailor throws his arms about his neck, and, clinging convulsively, drags his head down and buries it in the water. But the brave man clings as hard to the half-dead sailor as the sailor clings to him—clings on, in spite of the strain on his muscles, and the suffocating waves. Three or four of the boatmen have hold of his logs, and arc doing their utmost to pull him back into the boat, but cannot. So the fight goes on. And now, as if in its spite the storm can spare no possible circumstance of horror, right down on the struggling pair drifts the wreck of one of the vessel’s largest boats. One touch from this, and drowning man and rescuer will both be broken like eggs against the lifeboat’s side. Providentially, and almost at tho last moment, the mass veers to one side, and just passes clear. The crew, finding it impossible to haul the fastdrowning men over the high-peaked bow, now drag them along the side to the waist, where the gunwale is low. Here, with a strong pull and all togetlier, both their mate and the sailor are hauled on board and saved.
And now for the poor boy, still clinging by the bulwarks, and crying piteously. As each wave breaks over the vessel, the boatmen expect to see him washed overboard like a cork. Nothing can be done to help. They have tried again and again, and cannot haul the boat closer, and to venture along that hawser is to court certain death. Even if a man reached the ship by its means, how could he bring the boy back along it ? None the less, it is decreed that this boy shall be saved.
A tall sea arches down upon him. One of the men gives a cry, “ What’s that? Look out!” Sure enough, the boy is overboard. “There he is ! No; only his cap!” The boy lifts yonder on that sea—he is coming straight for the boat. The tide has slackened, and the rush of sea past the boat is not nearly
Digitized by GOOQle
A WONDERFCL ESCAPE.
559
so rapid as it was, consequently the boy comes floating slowly towards them. Now he seems to struggle, and again he floats, with his head under water. As he drifts close up, the crew shout with excitement. One of them seizes a boathook and manages to hook him by the jacket. He is drawn close and lifted over the gunwale, gently but sorrowfully. “ He’s gone, poor little chap' ” says one of the men. For the moment, now, all their efforts are needed to get clear of the wreck, cut the cable, and raise the sail; all of which being done successfully, the boat runs rapidly homeward before the wind, and they have time to look to the poor boy again. They chafe his hands, and rub his back and limbs, and pour some rum into his mouth, and, after about half an hour, they have the joy to see signs of returning life, and their efforts are redoubled. Some of the men take the driest of their jackets and, wrapping him up warmly, lay him under the mizzen-sail. He eventually recovers.
But the strangest part of this eventful story is still to come. On the homeward way a strange object is descried bobbing up and down in the waves. A nearer approach shows it to be a man ; and as tho boat overhauls him he turns out, to their amazement, to be the captain of the vessel, who had drifted off into the darkness, as all had thought, to certain death. He is taken on board in an exhausted condition, and at first seems to be dying, but after a time gets a little better, and is able to tell them that his vessel was the Provident ia, a full-rigged ship from Finland, and that he himself is a Russian Finn, which accounts for his marvellous endurance in the water, os the Finns are the hardiest of sailors. Eleven of his men had left the ship in a boat, and were blown over to Boulogne, where they landed; so the disaster was not so fatal to life as had been feared at first.
For* our next story let ns move up the coast to the eastward, where the Knock lightship tosses off the Long Sand.
On Sunday, the 2nd of January, 1881, the Indian Chief (Captain Fraser), a ship of 1,238 tons register, set sail from Middlesborough with a general cargo for Yokohama She carried twenty-nine souls, counting her North Country pilot. The weather was thick, but all went well until Wednesday morning at half-past two, when they made the Knock light. The water just here is full of shoals. To the southward lies the Knock, and close over against it the Long Sand; while beyond, to the westward, the Sunk Sand lies in wait for ships.
The Knock light had scarcely hove in sight when the wind shifted and brought down a squall of rain from the cost The Indian Chief was carrying all plain sail, with the exception of her royals, which were furled, and the mainsail that hung in the buntlines. Finding that she was making leeway and drifting towards the Long Sand, the skipper gave orders to put the ship about
The helm was put down, but the main-braces fouled, and before they could
Digitized byVrOOQlC
660 THE STOBY OF THE SEA.
be cleared the ship was in irons. They then set to work to wear the ship; but there was a good deal of confusion, the vessel heeling over in the gathering breeze; and though it was pitch dark, everyone knew that the Sands were close aboard.
Tlie ship paid ofi’, and then at a critical moment the spanker-boom fouled the wheel. Still the vessel came about. But scarcely were the braces belayed on the starboard tack than she struck the Sand broadside on, and brought up shivering.
They let go sheets and halliards at once, but no man dared to go aloft. The canvas up there was banging about in a manner that made the masts
OFF HARWICH.
(From a Drawing* by H\ L. FF^ta, X.K*X.)
bend and jump like fishing-rods. They lit a flare and sent up rockets, and soon were rejoiced to see their signals answered by the Sunk lightship and the Knock At this time very few on board realised the gravity of their case. The sky had cleared, the easterly wind made the stars sharp and bright, and it was comforting to watch the lightship's rockets rushing up and bursting into sparks over their heads. Help would come soon.
But meanwhile the wind was sweeping up to a gale; and a bitter cold wind it was. It seemed as long as a month before the morning broke. When it did break, one of the men yelled out that he saw the sail of a lifeboat dodging among the seas. He was mistaken. The sail belonged to a fishing smack. But the men watched her eagerly as she stood on and off, on and off, evidently shirking the huge seas that were by this time boiling round the Indian Chief. At last she hauled her sheet aft, put her helm over, and headed away for Harwich, where she brought news of the wreck at eleven that
Digitized by ^OOQlC
Digitized by
Google
"WILL THAT FETCH HEK i
10
Digitized by GOOQle
THE WRECK OF THE INDIAN CHIEF.
501
morning. As sho turned away one of the crew groaned, but no man spoke, and they all returned to the shelter of the deck-house.
The gale was now at its height, and the sheets of flying water made it
almost impossible to stand on the sloping decks. But worse was to come, for the flood was making. Hitherto the water had been too low to knock the ship out of her sandy bed; but as the tide rose it lifted her, bumping her ten times worse than before, and straining her with every blow.
The pilot advised Captain Fraser to let go his starboard anchor, hoping that the set of the tide would slew the ship’s stern round, and bring her head to
36
Digitized by
Google
562
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
sea. So the anchor was dropped, but it did no good; and a little while after they heard a crash, and knew that her back was broken.
The captain now called out to the men to get the boats over. Three boats were launched. Two filled as soon as they touched the water; the third went adrift with two hands in her, and was swamped in a moment The poor fellows in her vanished just as you might blow out a light The men went hopelessly back to the deck-houses. A little before five in the afternoon a terrific sea swept down and left little of these houses standing but their uprights. There was nothing for it now but to take to the rigging. The hold was already full of water, washing almost flush in the great holes where the deck timbers had been blown up. Some of the men made for the forerigging, but the captain ^ang out to take to the mizzen-mast; he believed that the safest. Hearing this, some of the men, who were already scrambling forward returned and followed him; but the rest held on and gained the fore-top. Seventeen got upon the mizzenmast, and began to hack away with their knives at the running gear, to use it as lashings. Nobody went near tho mainmast, for, now that the ship had broken her back, they all knew that to be doomed, and the captain feared it would drag the foremast with it when it fell.
The chief mate, Mr. William Meldrum Lloyd (one of the survivors), was next the captain in tho mizzen-top. He afterwards described their situation thus:— ^
“ As the sun sank the wind grew more freezing, and I saw the strength of some of the men lashed over me leaving them fast. The captain shook hands with me, and, on the chance of my being saved, gave me some messages to take home—too sacred to be written down, sir. He likewise handed me his watch and chain, and I put them in my pocket. The canvas streamed in ribbons from the yards, and the noise was like a continuous roll of thunder overhead It was dreadful to look down and watch the decks ripping up, and notice how every sea that rolled over the wreck left less of her than it found.
“ The moon went quickly away. It was a young moon, with little power; but the white water and the starlight kept the night from being black, and the frame of the vessel stood out like a sketch done in ink every time the. dark seas ran clear of her, and left her visible upon the foam.
“ There was no talking, no calling to one another. The men hung in the topmast rigging like corpses; and I" noticed the second mate to windward of his brother in the top, sheltering him as best he could, .poor fellow.’ with his body, from the wind that went through our skins like showers of'arrows.
“On a sudden I took it in my head that the mizzen was 'not' as secure as the foremast. It came into my; head like a fright, and'I called’to the. captain that I meant to make for , the fore-top. I don’t know* whether he heard' me, or whether he made any answer < Maybe it was a. sort' of, craze of mine for tho moment, but I was wild with eagerness to leave that mast as soon as ever
Digitized byVrOOQlC
THE SURVIVORS ON THE FORE-TOP.
563
I began to fear for it I cast my lashings adrift and gave a look at the deck, and saw that I must not go that way if I did not want to be drowned. So I climbed into the cross-trees and swung myself on to the stay, so reaching the main-top, and then I scrambled'on to the main-topmast cross-trees, and went hand over hand down the topniast-stay into the- fore-top. Had I reflected before I left the mizzen-top, I should not have-believed I had the strength to work my way forward like that My hands felt as if they were skinned, and my finger-joints appeared to have no use in them. There were nine or ten men in the fore-top, all lashed and huddled together. The mast rocked sharply, and the throbbing of it to the blowing of the great tatters of canvas was a horrible sensation. From time to time they sent up rockets from the Sunk lightship—once every hour, I think—but we had long since ceased to notice those signals. There was not a man but thought his time was come; and though death seemed terrible when I looked down upon the boiling water below, yet the anguish of the cold almost killed the craving for life. It was now about three o’clock on Thursday morning. The air was full of the strange dim light of the foam and the stars, and I could very plainly see the black swarm of men in tho top and rigging of the mizzenmast. I was looking that way when a great sea fell upon the hull of the ship with a fearful crash. A moment after the mainmast went It fell quickly, and as it fell it bore down the mizzenmast.” '
The foremast still stood complete to the royal-mast, and the men gathered in the fore-top now peered down through the darkness and watched the mizzenmast slanting over the .bulwarks into the water, and the men lashed to it drowning. Their ship was by this time completely gutted, and they had given up all hope.
* * * * * ‘
About mid-day on Wednesday, word was brought to Ramsgate that a largo ship had gone ashore on the Long Sand, and Captain Braine, the harbour master, at once ordered the tug and lifeboat to put out to .her assistance/
The boat was the Bradford, one of the biggest on the coast, presented by Bradford town to the Lifeboat Institution. The tug was the Vulcan. She had a hard fight of it in the teeth of the wind; seas fairly covered her at times, and, by time they brought the Ramsgate Sands abeam,' every man in ‘ the boat was drenched to the skin, in spite of his overalls. They rigged up a piece of tarpaulin sail-cover against the mast, but within two minutes a heavy sea hit and washed it right aft into rags. There was nothing to be done but hold on to the thwarts, and shake themselves when the water came over. : >
They were heading north-cast for the Knock, and the wind blew from the north-east. Tire North Foreland gave some shelter at first; but, when 'they got clear of that, they felt the wind’s full fury, and a colder wind! none of them could remember,. In the coxswain’s words : " It was more like a
Digitized by Goode
564
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
flaying-maehine than a natural gale of wind; the feel of it on the face was like being gnawed by a dog. I only wonder that it did not freeze the tears it fetched out of our eyes ’ ” The seas, too, seemed miles long. But there was no giving up on board either the tug or the lifeboat.
Somewhere abreast of. the Elbow buoy, a smack that was running ported her helm to speak to them; her skipper had just time to yell out, “ A vessel on the Long Sand'" and, while the lifeboatmen waved their hands, she was astern and lost to sight. Next came by a collier named the Fanny,
CHARLES K FISH, _£^Co.tamr* t >!■ c/ tha +£ Hrittifttrd" ZVfe&Mt J’Wol Ji. A W'< W£rb J^dtrtiuruft.
and her coxswain, Charles Fish, “ Yes."
with her foretop - gallant yard gone; she was cracking on to carry the news to Ramsgate, and was making a big sputter under her topsails and foresail. At sight of the lifeboat her crew raised a cheer, and then she, too, had passed behind into the darkness of the night.
By this time the cold and wet were beginning to tell, and a small dose of rum was' measured out to the men. It was about half-past four in the afternoon, and drawing on dusk, when they sighted the green revolving light of the Kentish Knock lightship, a big, red-hulled boat, with the words “ Kentish Knock ” painted in long white letters on her sides; and a little after five they drew close to her. The tug hailed her first, and two men looking over her side answered; but what they said did not reach the lifeboat. In a minute or two, however, the Bradford was towed abreast, sang out, “ Have you seen the ship ? ’’
“ How does she bear ? ”
“Nof-wcst by north.”
“ Have you seen anything go to her ?"
The tug was now towing ahead, and all that they heard distinctly from the lightship was “ A boat; ” though some of the crew thought the answer was, “A lifeboat." But ten minutes later one of the men cried out that they were burning a flare on board the lightship, and, sure enough, there was a red signallight blazing over the bulwarks with a long shower of sparks. The tug put her helm down to return, and brought the lifeboat broadside to the sea. Twice, as the men held on,, the boat filled with water up to their necks; but every upward heave emptied her, like pulling a plug out of a wash-basin, and in a few minutes, they were again alongside the lightship. This time there were
Digitized by
Google
THE BRADFORD TO THE RESCUE!
565
six or seven men looking over her side. “What do you want?” shouted the lifeboatmen.
“Did you see the Sunk lightship’s rocket?” they all yelled together.
“HAVE TOO seen THE SHIT?” (p. 561).
“ Yes ! Did you say you saw a boat ? ”
The men on the lightship answered that they had not; there must have been some mistake over their first reply. So the coxswain shouted out to the tug, “ Pull us round to the Long Sand Head buoy I ” And they were promptly under way again with head to sea.
Digitized by
oogle
566
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
There was only a little bit of moon, westering fast, and besides this nothing to be spied in the darkness; but now and then, and at long intervals, the flash of a rocket from the Sunk' lightship. From time to time they burned a green hand-signal on the tug as well as in the lifeboat. But nothing could be seen of any wreck, and it was impossible to guess her whereabouts in that roaring blackness.
The lifeboatmen began to talk the matter over; and one, Tom Cooper, said, “ We had better stop here and wait for daylight.” “ I’m for stopping, too,” said Stephen Goldsmith. Robert Penny said, “ We’re here to fetch that wreck, and fetch it we will, if we wait a week.” “ Right,” said Charles Fish, the coxswain; and with that they all put their hands to their mouths, and raised a great shout of “Vulcan, ahoy!” The tug dropped astern. *'What do you want ? ” called out her skipper, Alfred Page.
" There’s nothing to be seen of the vessel, so we had better lie to for the night.”
“Very good,” said Mr. Page; and the steamer, without a word from her crew, resumed her station ahead, her paddles moving in the gigantic seas just fast enough to prevent her dropping astern.
Having decided to remain out all night, the men set to work to make themselves as comfortable as possible. The tug lay too far ahead to help them as a breakwater, and the tossing was too great to allow any sleep. But they turned to and got the foresail aft, and made a kind of coverlet of it. Even this was no easy job, the wind being so furious that to wrestle with that bit of sail was like “fighting with a steam engine.” Ten of the men snugged themselves away under this, while two kept watch on the after-grating thwart with the life-lines around them. The binnacle lamp gave just light enough to show a raffle of arms and legs and cork jackets beneath the sail where the men sprawled and huddled together for warmth. The water that fell into the boat kept filling this sail and pressing it down upon them, so that some had to lie almost flat on their faces; and when the pressure got beyond endurance, as from time to time it did, they would all get up and make one heave with their backs under the sail and throw the water out in that way.
So was passed that night of Wednesday, the 5th of January, 1881, by the shipwrecked men and those who had come out to rescue them—the men of the Indian Chief clinging, frozen and starved, to the stump of the mast above the wild sandbank; the men.in .the lifeboat, a little way off, hugging one another for warmth till the morning.
When morning broke, the first man in the lifeboat to look to leeward raised a shout of ".There she is!” He must have had eyes like a hawk to see her. For ,what was she ? Ohly a mast about three miles oft’—one single mast sticking up out of the white water, as thin and faint as a spider’s line. .This is what they had been waiting all night to see. Of course they saw no men
Digitized by LnOOQle
HELP AT LAST!
567
on the mast, and hod little hope of seeing any if they went nearer. And the seas on the sandbank were ten times worse than in the deep water where they lay.
Nevertheless, they did not hesitate. “ Let slip the tow-rope I ” was the cry, and “ Up foresail' ” and, two minutes after sighting the must, they were heading down straight before the wind for the broken seas.
Let us return to the foretop of the Indian Chief. Half an hour after her mizzenmast fell, a man, who was jammed up close to Mr. Lloyd, pointed out into the darkness, and cried, “ Isn’t that a steamer’s light ? ” Mr. Lloyd looked, but could see nothing. But presently another man called out that he could see a light, and then a third took up the cry. Mr. Lloyd told them to keep their eyes upon it, and watch if it moved. They said by-and-by that it was stationary, and, though they could not guess that it meant anything good for them, they kept their eyes upon this faint light through the dark hours. As the dawn broke, they saw the smoko of a steamer, and agreed that it was her light that they had seen. But no steamer could help them, and Mr. Lloyd was staring stupidly at the mizzenmast below him, and the drowned men washing about it, when a loud cry made him turn his. head, and he saw a lifeboat, under a reefed foresail, headmg direct for them.
“ It was a sight, sir, to make one crazy with joy, and it put the strength of ten men into every one of us. A man named Gillmore—I think it was Gillmore—stood up and waved a long strip of canvas. But I believe they had seen there were living men aboard us before that signal was made. The boat had to cross the broken water to fetch us, and in my agony of mind I cried out, ‘ She'll never face it 1 She’ll leave us when she sees that water i ’ For the sea was frightful all to windward of the Sand, and over it a tremendous play of broken waters raging one with another, a nd, making the whole surface resemble a boiling cauldron. Yet they never swerved a hair’s breadth. Oh, sir, she was a noble boat ■ We could see her crew—twelve. of them—sitting on the thwarts all looking ■ our way, motionless as carved figures; and there was not a stir among them as in an instant the boat leapt from the crest of a towering sea right into the monstrous broken tumble. The peril of these men, who were risking their lives for ours, made us forget our own situation. Over and over again the boat. was buried, but as regularly did sho emerge, with her crew fixedly looking our way, and their oilskins' and the lightcoloured side of ■ the boat sparkling in the sunshine; while the coxswain, leaning forward from the helm, watched our ship with a face of iron. By this time we knew that this boat was here to save us, and that she would, save us; and with wildly beating hearts wo unlashed ourselves and dropped over the top into the rigging. We were all sailors, you see, sir, and know what the lifeboatmen wanted, and what was to be done. Swift as thought wo had bent a number of ropes’-ends together, and, securing a piece of wood to this line, threw it overboard, and let it drift to tho boat. It was seized a hawser made fast, and wo dragged tho groat rope on hoard."
Digitized by LnOOQle
56S
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
But there was no rush to get into the boat. Two of the Indian Chief s men crawled out upon the mizzen-mast to the body of the second mate that-was lashed eight or nine feet over the side, and got him into the boat before they entered it themselves. The captain had been lashed in the mizzen-top, and now lay there with his arms over the mast and his eyes wide open. The coxswain of the lifeboat called out, "Take that poor fellow in there:” The crew replied, “He’s been dead four hours, sir.’’ So they scrambled into the lifeboat The second mate was still alive, but light-headed and crying feebly for his brother; but he lay quiet after a bit, and died in half an hour, though they chafed his feet and poured rum into his mouth, and did all they could for him.
Seventeen had perished, counting the second mate. Eleven were taken back through the broken water, and landed, that Thursday afternoon on the Ramsgate east pier—eleven live, but scarcely living, men, clad in oilskins, and walking with bowed backs, drooping heads, and nervous arms. The lifeboatmen, too, were exhausted; for fourteen hours they had been cruising about a bitter gale and tremendous seas, and their decision on Wednesday night to lay by and wait for the morning was one of the most heroicincidents in the history of that heroic boat, the Bradford.
hobeut leg eeTon.	The East Coast boatmen, of whose
deeds we have been telling, are the most famous in England. It may be because they descend from the old Jutes and. Danes, who were sailors from the beginning of history; while on other parts, of the coast we find the descendants of Saxons, who were fighters indeed, but. no great seamen. Nelson, let us remember, is a Scandinavian name.
Be this as it may, such fellows as the Deal boatmen can hardly be matched, either for pluck or hardiness or skilful handling of their craft. Let us go a little further up the coast—to Clacton-on-Sea, in Essex—and give a short account of one of these East Coast men, Robert Legerton, coxswain of the lifeboat AUx-rt Edward, who died in the spring of 1892.
He was made coxswain of the Albert Edward in 1878, having already had a long experience of seafaring. Within a few weeks of his appointment he was called upon to prove his metal, for the brig Garland, went on shore at the Gunfleet Sands, Legerton took out the boat promptly, and saved every man of the crew, nine in all.
Digitized byVtOOQIC
"THEY STUCK TO THEIR WORK" (p. 570;.
Digitized by LnOOQle
570
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
On the 18th of January, 1881, a cruel gale kept nearly every lifeboat on the East Coast busy in saving lives. Legerton went out to the Mapland and found the Hasselo, of Hangsund, ashore, a complete wreck, with her mast gone by the board, and her foreign crew in extremities. He took them off and landed them in a blinding blizzard. Many of his boatmen were frostbitten and suffered intensely. Three days later he was afloat again and searching the Sunk Sand; but this time the Harwich lifeboat had been before him in the work of rescue. Again, in September he went out to the Juana, of Norway, but her crew had been taken off by a smack before the lifeboat had arrived. In October he saved the Ocean, of Goole, with her crew, and took her to London. The behaviour of one of the rescued men should not pass without record. He was no sooner landed than he stole one of the oilskins belonging to the lifeboat. This was a trifle more than Legerton could stand, and the fellow, who called himself an Englishman, was taken before the magistrates, and suffered one month’s imprisonment
In that same October, and at daybreak on a Sunday morning, a coastguardsman saw rockets thrown up by the Gunfleet light-vessel, and summoned Legerton. The Albert Edward was quickly launched, but, with wind and tide against them, it seemed impossible to get out to the wreck. Legerton was not daunted. He rowed his boat out into the fairway, if by any chance he could get a tow from a passing steamer. One was quickly spied, but passed on without stopping for the lifeboat’s signals. The second — the Coneett, of Sunderland—stopped, took the lifeboat in tow, and steamed out to the Gunfleet. Moreover, the skipper of the Coneett was a man with a heart inside him. .Realising that these men had been pulling for hours to get into the fairway, he passed out a lino with refreshments for the lifeboat .crew. This put renewed pluck into them. . When the Connett cast off the lifeboat Legerton saw that they had daring work before them. Madeleine was the name of the vessel, and he rightly guessed her crew to be Frenchmen. Letting go his anchor, he veered down to the ship, and after a time got a rope on board. But a huge sea carried the wreck further on the sands, and the rope parted. Legerton consulted his crew', and, at the risk of their lives, they made a second attempt, when a tremendous wave hurled the Albert Edward almost on to the Frenchman’s deck, smashing the rudder and other portions of the boat. Still they stuck to their work, and one by one took off the sixteen Frenchmen. One of the foreigners saved himself by clutching the board of a lifeboatman named John Greer. They were landed amidst ringing cheers on Clacton Pier. The French Government presented Legerton with its gold medal, bearing the following:—“Ministere de la Marine ct des Colonies, a Robert Legerton, Marin Anglais, courage ct devoument, 1881. Republiquo Fran^aise.” A second-si zed gold medal was also prosen tcd to the second ■ coxswain, ‘ Jaincs • Cross; whilst a silver medal was presented to each of the crew by the same Government.
Digitized by
Google
THE DEEDS OF ROBERT LEGERTON.
571
We may pass over many occasions on which the Albert Edward did good service, and come to January 23rd, 1884, A strong K.W. gale had been blowing all day, and just before midnight Legerton observed flares away in the south-west. He signalled for his crew to assemble, and, having reefed, down, proceeded to the Swim Channel. Here he ordered his second coxswain to bum a blue light, in the hope of getting an answering light from the wreck. Whilst the light was being held, two or three nasty seas in quick succession struck the Albert Edward. One went into the sails and filled the boat, which, owing to the quickness of the seas, had no time to empty herself. The coxswain put the helm down, but she would not answer. She heeled over and capsized. Legerton called out for every man to hold on, and sho came up on her broadside, and lay so. Legerton now pulled himself from under the ropes up to the port side, and there found one of the crew, John Burrell by name, who pulled the pin from the tabernacle and let the fore-mast come partly down. After vainly trying to clear the sheets that were foul, Legerton got out his knife and cut them adrift. The boat’s head being then checked by the anchor, which had fallen out of her, sho came round head to sea, and immediately righted. But when the roll of the crew was called, two had gone for ever—Cross, the secund coxswain, and Cat term ole. They had been entangled, no doubt, in the ropes. Legerton remained at anchor till daylight, but could see nothing of them. With a heavy heart he gave orders to make sail for Clacton. The scene on Clacton beach when they returned was too pitiful for description; the second coxswain left a wife and five children, and Cattermolo a wife and three children. Tho town quickly subscribed no less than £1,600 for them.
Three days after Legerton was afloat again to the aid of s.s. Hawthorn. He took off part of the crew, returned to telegraph for the Harwich tug, and ultimately saved the rest of the crew and the vessel. This wreck proved that a larger lifeboat was needed for Clacton, and a new boat, 39 feet in length, was supplied by the Institution.
Legerton's last service was in March, 1891. The coastguard had received information that a man had landed in an open boat, almost full of water, with the news that the remainder of his shipmates (four in number) were on board the ship J. IK. Babcll, of Beaumaris, bound for London with a cargo of granite. The Albert Edward (tho now boat bore the old name) was towed out by a passing steamer to within two miles of the Gunfleet light. Here the hawser was slipped, and the lifeboat bore down on the wreck through a terrible sea. Just as they arrived in sight of her, the Walton lifeboat also came up and let go her anchor. Legerton was determined, if possible, to save what remained of the crew, and made a dash for two men in the port rigging. The lifeboat was on the starboard side, and one man was got into her, who reported that the other man was dead, and the captain and cook drowned. • J. Roper (one of the crew of the lifeboat) clambered up the starboard rigging and came
Digitized by Goode
572
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
down on the port, cut adrift the dead body from its lashings, tied a rope to it. and it was hauled into the lifeboat The steam lifeboat, Duke of Northumberland, now came upon the scene, and would have taken them to Harwich ; but, as Legerton had everything ready, he up sail, and landed both the living man and the lifeless body at Clacton.
In the fourteen years during which he commanded the Clacton lifeboat Robert Legerton saved fourteen ships and 216 lives from destruction.
HAM8OATE HARBOUR, (From a Drotcinj bi/ IF. L. Wyllitt A.Ji.A.)
His record was an extraordinary one. But the grandest record of all is that of Charles E. Fish, ex-coxswain of the Bradford, the same whom we saw lying by all night to succour the men of the Indian Chief. He became UnderHarbourmaster at Ramsgate, and received, besides numerous other medals, the first Institution Gold Second Service Clasp ever granted in this country, for saving 877 lives from thirty-nine vessels, and^ seventy-seven vessels, during twenty-six years of service, having put to sea 591 times.
Digitized by
Google
CHAPTER XXIV.
ROCKETS AND OTHER LIKE-SAVING APPARATUS.
Circumstancea in which the Lifeboat is Useless—Methods of Throwing n Line from a Ship to the Shore—Naroa’l “Life Kite"—Commander Irvine's “Shoulder lane-Throwing Gun"—Methods of Throwing a Line from the Shore to a Ship—Rockets and Mortars—How to Use the Rocket Line —The Rocket in Action—Wreck of the Mazinthien in Peterhead South Bay—Mise after Miss—A Plucky Coastguardsman—Tho Crew Saved after a Five Hours’ Fight—Wreck of tho Dewn on the Brissons—A Solitary Survivor—Sharp Eyes on tho Look-out—The Sennon Lifeboat Goes Out—How to Manage a Boat in Surf or Broken Water—A Rescue at Padstow, Cornwall—Rules for Rowing Against a Sea—And for Running with a Sea—Steep and Shallow Shores- How to Beach a Boat.
A LTHOUGH, as we have seen, the lifeboat has done incalculable good there are obviously occasions on which life must be saved—if it can be saved at all—by other means. A vast number of wrecks occur on reefs and rocks that would dash the stoutest lifeboat to pieces if she approached. Take the common case of an ungovernable ship charging full upon a precipitous cliff. Clearly this is no case for the lifeboat. The thing to do is to take her crew off, and land them on terra Jirma on the top of the cliff. But how is this to be done ? The answer is easy. We must get a Une between the vessel and the shore, and haul the men along it
This lino may be thrown either («) from the ship to the shore, or (6) from the shore to the ship. The former is, of course, more difficult in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred; for it stands to reason that to take aim with a rocket or any similar apparatus is much harder on board a tossing ship with a bewildered crew than it is on dry land with a set of trained men. And, therefore, we may take this method of communication first, and get it out of the way before we come to the commoner method of using the rocket or mortar. That a ship should have it in her own power to establish communication with a lee shore is obvious; for she may be wrecked on an utterly desolate coast, or among savages who never heard of Manby’s Mortar or Boxer’s Rockets; or, again, help from shore may fail.
One of the earliest, simplest, and least expensive modes by which a wreck could communicate with a lee shore was that devised by Lieutenant George S. Nares (who afterwards commanded a famous Arctic expedition, and become Sir
Digitized byVvOOQlC
574
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
George). It was simply an adaptation of the common, or school-boy’s, kite; and a beautifully simple adaptation. A lee shore means, of course, a shore on which the wind is blowing. Where the wind is blowing a kite will go, provided it does not blow in ribbons; and where a kite will go, its line will follow.
The accompanying diagram will give the reader a clearer idea of Lieutenant
Nares’s Life Kite than he could obtain from any amount of description.
The
kite is fitted in the usual manner, with two lines secured
to the upright cane
in the middle; one
LIEUTENANT NAMES’8 LIFE-KITE.
(b) close to the top of the cane, and the other close to the bottom. The upper one flies the kite in the ordinary manner; the lower is used to pull the kite edgewise to the wind, and cause it to drop when necessary’. The two are connected together, the lower one being run .through a ring (t), fastened at the end of the upper one. This upper
line has also a swivel (s) at the end, to keep the turns out of the line used
to fly the kite with. The sides of the kite arc fitted to bend back, so that it may be made to hold less wind as. the gale increases. In constructing the tail, as every school-boy will tell you, length is more important than weight
Now, to fly the kite, you make fast your line to the swivel (s), and open the kite and spread it to the width you judge best by crossing the stick at the back (a). ' Sec the tail clear, and let go. If the kite be unsteady, you had better lengthen the tail; if it pull too hard, bend the two wings back a little further.
Suppose your wreck to be on a beach. You get the kite steady in the air with about 100 yards of the line out You then take another line—about twenty yards will probably suffice—tie one end of it to the kite line, and tho other to a life-buoy. Let a man get into the life-buoy. Then veer away, and the kite will pull the man ashore through the surf When the time comes to lower the kite, you gradually tauten in the lower line (p w).
Digitized by
Google
KITES, GUNS, ROCKETS, AND MORTARS. 575
Suppose, on the other hand, that you are near a cliff’, with people standing on it, but unable to send help: you have only to bend a long lead-lino to the kite line; and when the people get hold of this lead-line they can use it to pull a stronger rope ashore..
One has often heard of the steeple-jack whose ladder broke and left him at the top of a tall chimney-stack. J He pulled oft' his stockings, unravelled the worsted, made a long line of it, weighted it with a button, and let it down to the ground. The worsted brought up a thick twine. The twine was weighted and lowered, and brought up a stout cord. And the cord in the same manner brought up a trustworthy rope, upon which the steeple-jack slid down to his admiring friends. ‘ The same principle holds in effecting communication between a wrecked ship and the shore. The first line may be slight, but it will serve to carry a stouter one.
A later invention' than Nares’s Life Kite, and a handier, is Commander J. D’Arcy Irvine's Shoulder Line-throwing Gun. It is well worth the attention of all shipowners; for not only may a vessel find herself in distress upon a coast where rockets are unknown, or have given out, but lifeboats often fail to reach a wreck, though they may succeed in getting within 300 or 400 feet, and with this apparatus on board ship a line could be carried to the lifeboat. The gun is a 12-bore, and about 4 feet G inches in length. It weighs 6 pounds 6 ounces without line connections; 10 pounds with line connections. The length of the line is 150 yards, and a cartridge containing 2J drachms of powder sends the line on its way.
But by far the commoner mode of communication is from the shore to the ship; and in England this is effected either by the mortar or the rocket apparatus. Both were designed expressly for this service, and each has its advantages. The range of both is about the same. The rocket apparatus is the easier, to cany along a rough coast to the spot where it is wanted. On the other hand, the mortar apparatus is less liable to be spoilt by damp, and is less expensive. This last is a very considerable advantage, as it allows the men to be drilled in its use oftener than in the use of the costly rocket apparatus.
The lifeboat, as we have seen, is worked by volunteers under the superintendence of the National Lifeboat Institution. The rocket and mortar apparatus around our coasts is, for the most part, in charge of the coastguard; and could not be in better hands, since the coastguard form a disciplined body, trained in gunnery, and continually on the look-out for ships.
The working of the rocket or mortar is simple enough, the latter being fired just like an ordinary sky-rocket, with a line made fast to the rocket stick. The first object, of course, is to get this line over the wrecked ship, so that the crew may catch and haul it on board.*
• In the case of the mortar, it has been proved that ar. angle of forty-five degrees is the elevation which gives the longest range. The best angh for a rocket varies from thirty-five to forty-eight degrees. ‘ . ,
Digitized byVrOOQlC
576
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
SHOULDER UNE-THRuWING GUN.
(1) In Use; (2) Hea ly for Firing ; (3) The Projectile
Now suppose a wreck to be lying at a little distance from shore, and that your rocket apparatus has been brought down to the cliff, and everything is ready for throwing a line. The first shot or rocket is usually discharged with the line coiled in a box, which should therefore be tilted slightly towards the wreck. For subsequent shots you may coil the line on the ground, but great care must be taken that nothing fouls it in its rapid run out when the rocket is fired. The utmost care should be taken with the first shot, when the dryness and cleanliness of the rope give the best chance of success. As it becomes wet and dirty, the firing becomes more difficult.
We will suppose that the first shot is successful; that the line has been thrown over the vessel, has caught in the rigging, and has been secured by someone on board. A signal to this effect should now be made by the crew. Thus: if the rescue is made during daytime, one of the men will separate himself from his comrades, and wave his hat or a Hag or any other suitable article; if at night, a rocket or a gun will be fired, or a blue light burnt, or an intermittent light shown.
As soon as this signal is seen on the beach, the people on shore take their next step. They have ready a " whip,”
formed of a small line (about one and a-half inch) rove through a single block with a tail to it. This line is at least double as long as the range of the rocket line; and the ends of it must he spliced together, thus forming an endless rope running through the block. The tail of the block should l)e about twelve feet long. This “ whip ” is now made fast to the in-shore end of the rocket line, and a signal made to the men on the wreck to haul it ofl'. This signal is much like the other. One of the men on the shore will separate himself from the rest, and, in daytime, will wave a small red Hag, or, at night, will show an intermittent red light.
When this is seen on board the vessel, her crew will haul on the rocket line until they get the “ whip ” and block, when they will make fast the tail of the -latter as high up the mast as they can; or, if the mast be gone, to the highest part of the vessel This being done, they have obviously an endless line running between them and the shore—a line which can be worked either from shore or on board. In certain cases this “ whip ’’ alone will be sufficient
Digitized by UnOOQle
THE BARQUE DIANA.
577
for hauling the men to dry land. But, as a rule, it is better to run out a hawser by means of the “ whip,” and haul in the men along this hawser—each man being secured in a chair, sling, basket, or cradle. The Americans have even invented a kind of metallic car, by which several people can be brought ashore at the same time. At the wreck of the Ayrshire on the coast of New Jersey, this invention was put to the test, and 201 people were saved by it from what appeared certain death.
Let us now take some instances of the work done by this apparatus.
The Austrian barque, Diana, of Piccolo Lossini, 535 tons register, Captain Bonifacio Cattarinich, laden with wheat, left Falmouth for Dublin early on
ROCXET AJFAHATV8.
(m) Brtethes Buoy or “ Cntdle *; (b) Tripod for Firing; (c) Rocket and Stick; (i) Section of Rocket; (c) Arrangement of Une in Box, First Layer; (/) Second Layer.
Tuesday morning, 8th December, 1874, weather thick and stormy. When about eight miles south-west of the Wolf Rock lighthouse, near the Land's End, she encountered a strong south-westerly gale and had some of her canvas blown away, which made it necessary for her to return to Falmouth to refit. She failed, however, to clear the Lizard, and at 3.30 P.M. sJm was on the sands and in the surf in Gunwalloe Church Cove. About half an hour before, she had been seen in the haze off Mullyon Cliffs, a very heavy and awkward sea running into Mount’s Bay at the time. The rocket apparatus was got out, and the lifeboat’s crew were standing ready, when the vessel, which for a few minutes had been lost to sight in the mist, was again descried off Mullyon Island, where for some cause she was compelled to wear ship. This 37
Digitized by LnOOQle
578
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
but hastened her doom; it was now only a question on what particular spot she would strike. That it might not be against the cliffs was the hope of all
“ It was a sad, yet awfully splendid sight,” writes the Rev. E G. Harvey in his little history of Mullyon, “ to witness the fine ship proudly rushing along in her wild career through and over the whitened waves, under and almost close to the lofty cliffs, nearer and nearer at every moment to swift and inevitable destruction. And the poor souls on board I How many ? Will they escape ? Be drowned ? Or killed against the rocks ? Heaven help them' A signal gun is fired. Ah 1 no need for that now! It seems like mockery to us who know from an only too long and sad experience the nature of the impending catastrophe. About four minutes and she nears Poljew, but, clearing this, she strikes on the sand at Church Cove, where she lies stem on to the breakers, which soon deluge her in foam.
"The rocket apparatus is planted and a line fired, but it misses her. A second is fired. ‘ Well done, Philip Angel!1 It falls right between her main and mizzen masts, but, becoming entangled in the rigging, does not reach the deck, and before they can secure it a third line is fired which falls across the poop. This is easily caught, and by it the hawser hauled out, and immediately is the cradle sent out on its errand of mercy. It brings in first the captain’s wife, and then the captain, who was so exhausted as to require support on his way to the nearest farm-house; after that the crew in couples to the number of twelve were taken off, until the mate alone was left, and then he, too, is hauled to shore in safety amid the grateful cheers of the assembled spectators. The crew, who had left their all on board, were clothed temporarily by tho fishermen and villagers of the neighbourhood, and then taken for the night, some to Gunwalloo fishing village, and some to Mullyon Churchtown, where they were made as comfortable as circumstances would allow.”
On Thursday, March 22nd, 1883, the whaling steamer Mazinthien, left Dundee for the Davis Strait fishery. Meeting a strong north-easterly breeze soon after starting, her master, Captain Soutar, resolved to run for shelter into Peterhead Bay. Here she lay over Friday, the weather being moderate but breezy. Her anchorage was considered the safest in the bay, and she was held by a heavy starboard anchor. Later on she dropped her port anchor as welL
On Friday night, the barometer falling and the weather generally looking like mischief, everything was made as snug as possible.
All went pretty well until shortly after midnight, when (according to the story of the sailor's who kept watch on deck) a tremendous sea hit the vessel, knocked off the hatches and companion head, and made a clean sweep of the deck. Vast quantities of water poured down into the ship and upon the men asleep in their bunks below. As quickly as they could they ran up on deck. A vicious gale was blowing, and they soon saw that their vessel was dragging
Digitized by^OOQlC
THE kAZlNTHIEN.
579
her anchors. The captain ordered “ half-steam ahead.” All hands were turned out, but they could do nothing against combined wind and wave. Slowly, but steadily, the Mazinthien was borne down towards the rocks. Flares were burnt at once, and attempts were made to throw up rockets. For some reason or other the rockets would not go off However, the flares served their purpose, and alarmed the coastguard, who lost no time in signalling for the rocket apparatus; and in a very short while this was being carried in its cart along the south turnpike road towards the shore opposite the wreck.
By this time the gale was raging its hardest, with bursts of hail and sleet, and so bitterly cold that the men engaged with the rocket apparatus could not stand by it for more than a few minutes at a time. Every now and then one of them would be driven to seek shelter, but not before his hands had swollen to almost double their natural size. The tar barrels that had been lit on the doomed ship shone out of the pitchy darkness and showed her desperate position.
The first rocket fired was swept by the gale far to leeward. But it had ranged far enough to show that with a good aim and full allowance for the wind the wreck might be reached. While the coastguard were preparing for a second shot, an enormous sea broke, and, racing up the beach, drenched them from head to foot in icy water. The men stuck to their posts, but unhappily the tripod was displaced, and this interfered with the accuracy of the next shot, which again went wide. The third shot was a good one. This time the rocket threw its line athwart the jibboom stays; but it gave way before the force of wind and wave. A fourth rocket went well over the vessel; but again the gale took the line before it could catch in any portion of the wreck, and swept it far to leeward, where the line became fouled among the rocks, A coastguardsman named Stilbbins and a brigade volunteer named Davidson rushed out to get the line clear. As they did so, another gigantic wave heaved clean over the ship and burst on the shore—a wave so vast that those who saw it coming ran to save their lives. They had run as far as the rocks, full fifty yards further in shore than any wave had yet reached, when it overtook them. Many were flung down; about fifteen were carried back for some distance in the reflux. Stubbins and Davidson, however, were far worse off The former was full fifty yards from the shore, and Davidson a little behind him, when the deluge overwhelmed them and whirled them off their legs. Davidson managed to clutch a rock, and was holding to it for his life, when he caught sight of Stubbins, whom the receding wave was carrying out to sea. Whereupon, regardless of his own peril, this brave volunteer plunged into the surf and held his companion fast until the immediate danger was over. Then in a few seconds their comrades on the beach came running to their help and both men were rescued, much exhausted.
The fifth rocket was now fired. At the moment of firing a wave struck the apparatus and disturbed the aim. The rocket went low, struck the vessel
Digitized by Goode
580
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
amidships, and went right through her bulwarks. The crew, however, got hold of the line, and had actually hauled in the warp by its means, when again the storm tore the lines away and broke them among the rocks.
All the rockets had now been fired, yet nothing had been accomplished.
THE ROCKET WAGGON.
Dawn broke and revealed the steamer, which had now drifted to within 250 yards of the shore; so close that from time to time they could hear the cries of the unhappy men, now plainly to be seen crouching on the after-deck, and wondering, no doubt, at the cause of this fatal delay.
At this juncture Mr. Good, the chief officer of the coastguard, who was in command of the party, determined on the bold attempt of warping out to the wreck. The chief boatman, Joshua Coghlin, volunteered. He was placed in the “ breeches ” and sent off’. All went well until he reached the bend of the line; but from the continual immersion in the icy water, and the violent strain on his hands caused by the rolling of the vessel, he was here obliged to desist, and signalled to be drawn on shore, where he arrived completely exhausted.
A fresh supply of rockets had by this time arrived, and a sixth was now discharged. It fared no better than the rest. Again the lines were carried away, and fouled hopelessly among the rocks.
For five hours now the rocket party had been battling against ill-success
Digitized by Tooele
THE ROCKETS MISCARRY.
581
in this fearful weather. Still they were unsubdued. A fisherman named Buchan put on a lifebelt and, lashing a rope round him, went out to try if it were possible to free the lines. This he managed to do; but the exposure so benumbed him that he was unable to return, and had to be dragged on shore by the rope around his waist.
By this time news of the wreck had spread along the coast, and hundreds of people lined the shore in the morning light. Their presence gave the unhappy crew fresh hope. Yet their case was almost desperate. Three more
“ IBB MAN WAS NOW ALL BITT INSENSIBLE " (p. 682).
rockets had been fired, but not one of them had reached there. She was rapidly breaking up. Her engine fires had long been drowned out, and the water had risen above the berths. One of the crew, William Hoy, volunteered to warp ashore with a line attached to his body.
Digitized by LnOOQle
582 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
The warp was made fast high up in the mizzen rigging, and a life-buoy fixed to a block and tackle. Owing to the height at which the warp had wisely been fixed, Hoy was able to move himself along rapidly, out of reach of the waves. The people on the beach sent up cheer after cheer as he came along to within fifty yards of the shore. But here his strength gave out The previous hours of exposure, the violent exertion now, and the sheets of cold spray that flogged him, proved together too much for him. It was clear he could make no further effort. John Davidson volunteered to go out to his help. He was put into the breeches and slipped down the line. His additional weight, of course, depressed the rope, and gave it a downward dip, which made matters easier for Hoy, who now put forth a last effort and managed to get close to the beach. A rush was instantly made towards him: somebody threw a rope, but tho man was now all but insensible, and could not grasp it. The next attempt was more successful, and amid the cheers of the crowd' Hoy was safely brought to the beach. The rope which he had brought with him was now attached to the apparatus lines, and so, with great skill and infinite pains, communication was at last established with the vessel. The crew, about thirty in all, with their captain and mate, were soon landed on the beach; and so ended an affair in which, time after time, the lives of these men had been despaired of.
On the night of Friday, October 23rd, 1868, the Government lighter Devon was making for Penzance tlirough the heavy Atlantic swell that ran off Land’s End. The Devon was a good sea boat, and made little account of the gale; but somehow her officers managed to mistake their bearings, and ran her hard on to the Brissons, a double islet of rock lying about a mile off Cape Cornwall
Thus suddenly awakened to the gravity of his position, the captain gave the order to lower the boats. But these were broken to pieces almost as soon as they touched the water, and the violent concussion of the seas broke up the lighter in a very short time. Thirteen of the crew were drowned at once, together with the captain and a woman and two children, who had been taken on board as passengers. A few tried to leap from the lighter to the rock; but these were either drowned or knocked senseless by the wreckage. One man only gained the rock alive.
This man—George Davis by name—was first hurled, stunned and bleeding, on tho rock, and then washed away again by the back-rush of the waters. Again he was dash eel on the stones and again sucked back. The third time (having but a little consciousness left) he managed to scramble up out of reach and to jam himself among the boulders. Here he lay through the night, half-senseicss, remote from succour, surrounded by the cruel seas.
As morning dawned, the dim coast gradually revealed itself to the castaway; but he could see no sign of help. The vessel had disappeared. Nothing remained- but a few floating timbers to show that a wreck had occurred.
Digitized by LnOOQle
CAST AWAY ON THE BRISSONS.
583
But, as it happened, these Heating timbers had been seen, almost as soon as day broke, by the old coastgnardsman on Cape Corn wait He called his mates, and pointed out to them the 11 spot of something” heaving by the Brissons. It was no good. The others could not see it. The old man stuck to his story and would not bo argued down ; it was Athanaxiuh contra mutuhuw in a small way, and Athanasius, as usual, prevailed in the end. Finding he would not bo convinced, they ended by sending messengers down to Sen non with news that a vessel was on the Brissons, and the lifeboat should go out.
Let it Ite understood that the old coast guardsman had seen no human figure on the rock—only a few timbers floating. Still, there was just a chance that some human being might be clinging to these timbers. On this chance the lifeboat put out with a crew of ten fishermen; the coxswain, Matthew Nichols, and Mr. Morrison, the coastguard officer, with his rocket apparatus.
The seas were still running furiously, but the boat was a good one, and the men took her out well. They reached the Brissons, and rowed around the reef. Of the wreck there was no doubt. Broken timbers in plenty confirmed the old coastguardsman’s story. But neither on wreckage nor on rock was there any sign of life. The very gulls had been driven inland by the weather. Getting no answer to their shouts, the crew turned their boat’s nose towards home and pulled rapidly away from the reef. The coxswain took a lust look at the desolate Brissons, and at that moment—his very last chance of being seen —the unhappy castaway, searching for a more sheltered nook to die in, came around the crag into sight. With a shout, the rescuers brought their boat round. It was this shout that made Davis lift his eyes. Until this moment he had seen nothing of the lifeboat, nor guessed that help was near. For a moment he stood dumbfounded with joy, then threw up his arms and signalled wildly.
But he was far from being saved yet. The wild seas surging round the Brissons forbade the boat to approach near enough to take the man on board. On the windward side she would have been smashed against the rocks like an egg. To leeward, small black tips of rock, scattered here and there with white foam around them, warned the coxswain against approaching. In this state of affairs they determined to try the rocket apparatus.
They brought the boat to anchor accordingly about 180 yards to leeward of the Brissons, and began to gift the apparatus ready. They met with plenty of difficulties. At first the stand of the rocket tube was found to be too high. It was promptly unshipped and the apparatus lashed fore and aft. But now they found that the trigger would not work until the line was rove through a ring bolt. These small accidents are trifles on shore; but in a small boat among' heavy seas they may be anything but trifling. But far more serious than these is the difficulty—the impossibility, almost—of taking accurate aim
Digitized by
Google
584
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
and seizing the exact moment for the shot when a small boat is pitching and rolling under you, and pointing your machine now down towards the waves, now up against the very centre of the sky. But on this occasion Providence and human skill worked together for the unhappy Davis. Mr. Morrison seized the happy moment; the rocket whizzed true, clean over the ridge of the rock, and dropped its line so close to Davis that he could almost touch it by reaching out his hand. Mr. Morrison then made fast the life-buoy on the line, and signalled to the castaway to haul it in. A sailor hardly needs to be
told what to do in such a case; but Davis by
THB LAND'S END,
this time was so benumbed and exhausted that he had scarcely strength to draw the life-buoy home. When at length he got it in, a sailor’s instinct warned him not to take it to the water at the point where he was sitting, for here the floating timbers of the wreck, as they dashed about among tho breakers, would have fouled tho line, or perhaps killed him on the spot. Climbing up to a point of rock that jutted clear, he put on bis cork buoy and sprang well out into the sea The lifeboatmen hauled him in as fast as hands could
pull; still there was very little life left in him when they got him on board. Having wrapped him up and settled him in the bottom of the boat, they pulled smartly back to Seamen Cove, where in a very short time the man recovered. Curiously enough the lifeboat that saved George Davis, had been given to the Institution by a lady to perpetuate the memory of her husband, and the name of her husband was also George Davis.
We will conclude this chapter with some hints on the management of open boats in a surf or among heavy seas. Every vessel, of course, is compelled by law to carry boats. The necessity for this is most conspicuous in the case of a ship foundering at sea; but, even if she runs upon a coast, her boats may be used with great success. Again, we must remember that, in the absence of a lifeboat, open boats have often put out from shore and, with skilful handling, have effected the most wonderful rescues. The story of Grace Darling and the
Digitized by
Google
FIVE BRAVE LADIES.
585
crew of the Forfarshire steamboat is known to everybody. A feat less notable, but still worthy of mention, was performed at Padstow, Cornwall, in the year 1879, when five young ladies—the four Misses Prideaux Brune and Miss Nora O’Shaughnessy—at the risk of their lives, took a boat through a heavy sea to save an exhausted sailor, whose boat had capsized and drowned two of his companions. Samuel Bate, late assistant coxswain of the Padstow lifeboat, was
• »riiASO OVT INTO TUB »EA ” < P- 5MX
towing the ladies’ boat astern of his fishing-smack, when, seeing the accident, they requested to be cast oft' He demurred, but they insisted, and were very soon rowing—to use his expression—“ like tigers ” to the rescue through a furious sea But for their prompt arrival, no doubt the man must have perished like his companions. For this feat, each of tho young ladies received a silver medal from the National Lifeboat Institution.
But feats like these caimot be performed either by women or men unfamiliar with the behaviour of a boat in surf or broken water. The handling of such boats must vary from moment to moment, and must be guided at every moment by an experience which has become an instinct. Still, there are
Digitized by
Google
586
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
general principles, and once upon a time the National Lifeboat Institution was at the pains to collect information from no less than 128 different places on our coasts, and, as a result, to draw up a set of rules.
Rules for the management of boats in a surf or broken water naturally fall under two heads, according as the boat is proceeding from shore to sea against the surf, or running for the shore before the surf And before dealing with these separately, we may lay down the axiom that there is, as a rule, far mare danger in running for the shore before a broken sea tkan in putting out to sea against it; the danger lying in the chance that the boat will broach-to and upset, either by running her bow under water or letting the sea catch her sideways and overturn her broadside-on.
(1)	Rowing to seaward. The first and most important rule in this case is to get all possible speed on your boat. The reason for this is obvious. The danger of an approaching heavy sea lies in this, that it may knock the bows of the boat to one side and turn it broadside-on, or up-end it, either effect being fatal The boat’s only chance, .then, is to have such way on her as shall enable her to pass, end on, through the crest of the sea, and leave it quiekly bchind her.
It may happen that, by careful handling, a boat may be made to dodge the seas, so that each wave may break ahead of her. But whenever a sea cannot be avoided, her nose should be kept straight to it and her rowers should pull their hardest. If more speed can thus be given to the boat than suffices to prevent her being carried back by tho surf, her way may be checked a little on its approach, so as to give her an easier passage over it. But this must be done with great caution.
(2)	Running before a broken sea towards the shore. The one great danger in running before a broken sea (as we have seen) is that of broaching-to.
Tho cause of a boat’s broaching-to is briefly this, that, her own motion being in the same direction as that of the sea, she offers no resistance to it, but is carried before it Now, if a boat be running with her bow to the shore and her stern to the sea, the first effect of a roller, when it overtakes her, is to heave up the stem and, as a consequence, to depress the bow. If she then has sufficient inertia, or sluggishness (which will be proportionate to her weight), to allow the sea to pass her, she will go successively through the descending, the horizontal, and the ascending positions, as the crest of a wave passes successively her stern, her midships, and her bow: and she is safe.
But, if a boat, on being overtaken by a heavy roller, has not sufficient inertia to allow it to pass her, the first of these three positions alone occurs: her stern is tilted high in tho air, and the wave carries the boat before it with her bows deep in the hollow of the sea. It may, of course, happen that with careful steerage the boat runs thus for a considerable distance until the wave has broken and spent itself, and the danger is past for the moment. But, unfortunately, this is not the rule. Her bow is buried deep and its motion
Digitized by GOOQle
HANDLING OF BOATS IN BROKEN WATER.
587
checked; the mass of water behind presses the already tilted stern higher and higher, and the boat is turned end over end. Or—a commoner case—her motion forward being thus suddenly checked, her stern swings a little to one side, and in a moment the sea behind has flung her on her broadside and capsized her. It is thus that most boats are upset in a surf, especially on flat coasts; and in this way scores of lives are lost annually amongst merchant seamen when attempting to land after being compelled to desert their vessels.
From what we have said, it is clear that the great point will be to give our boat inertia at the moment when the surf overtakes her; to stop icr a moment her progress shoreward and let the sea pass her. This inertia may be given in two or three ways:—
(A)	By turning the bout's head to the sea before entering the broken water, and then backing in stem foremost, pulling a few strokes ahead to meet each heavy sea, and then backing astern. If a sea be really heavy and a boat small, this plan will generally be the safest.
(B)	If rowing to the shore with the stern seaward, by backing all the oars on the approach, of a heavy sea, and rowing ahead again as soon as it has passed to the bow of the boat, thus rowing in on the back, or safe side, of the wave.
(C)	If rowed in bow foremost, by towing astern a large stone, or a large basket, or a canvas bag made for the purpose, and termed a “ drogue.” These drogues were found to be in common use among the boatmen on tho Norfolk, coast. They are conical-shaped bags, shaped very much like a candle extinguisher, about two feet wide at the mouth and four and a half feet long. They are towed with the mouth foremost by a stout rope, a small line (termed a tripping-line) being fast to the apex or pointed end. When towed with the mouth foremost, they till with water and ofler a considerable resistance, thereby holding back the stern; by letting go the stouter rope and retaining the smaller line their position is reversed, when they collapse, and can be readily hauled into the boat.
A boat’s sail bent to a yard and towed astern loosed (the yard being attached to a line capable of being' veered, hauled, or let go) will act in some measure as a drogue, and will tend much to break the force of the sea immediately astern of the boat.
The best “ trim ” of a boat when running before heavy seas is deepest by the stem, which tends to prevent the stern being flung up or readily beaten aside by tho sea.
If your boat be worked by both sails and oars, take down her masts and sails before entering the broken water, and bring her to land under oars alone. If she have sails only, they should be much reduced, a half-lowered foresail or other small head-sail being quite enough.
We have still to tell how a boat should be beached or landed, and the manner of doing this will depend on whether the shore is steep or flat.
Digitized by GOOQle
588
THE STOKY OF THE SEA.
But, first, let us give one or two cautions. To begin with, it is rarely wise to desert a stranded vessel and take to the boats, unless that vessel is obviously going to pieces. But if a crew is really compelled to take to the
“MOWING .... LIKE TIOF.HS" (p. 585).
boats, too great precaution cannot be taken before attempting to land; and if the boats can possibly live out at sea, her crew should not be in a hurry to land, for several reasons. Even in a moderate wind—sometimes even in a calm—there will be often more surf on an open lee shore than any ordinary ship’s boat can manage with safety. Moreover, a surf never looks so formidable when viewed from seaward as when viewed from the land, and people in a boat outside the broken water are, therefore, apt to think it less dangerous
Digitized by
Google
HOW TO BEACH A BOAT.
589
than it really is. The shipwrecked crew should, therefore, if possible, coast along outside the surf until they reach some fishing village or coastguard station where they may be helped, or at least guided, by the people on shore. It must be remembered, too, that coast fishing boats are in general far better able than any ship's boat to cope with a surf, and the coast fishermen more skilful at this kind of work than the ordinary merchant sailor. At night, of course, double caution is necessary, and it is almost always safer to anchor the boat outside and wait for daylight. Light boats may ride out even a heavy gale in the open sea in safety by lashing their spars, oars, etc., together, and riding to leeward of them, secured to them by a spar; the raft thus formed will break the sea before it reaches the boat, and may either be anchored or drifting, according to circumstances.
But, suppose our crew to have determined on landing. They have first to make up their minds whether the shore is steep or flat. A steep beach is, of course, the easier, for there the first heavy fall of broken water will be on the beach itself and so the moment of greatest peril arrives when salvation is close at hand. But, on a flat shore, where the broken water extends to some distance from the beach—it may even be four or five miles—the outermost line of broken water is the heaviest and most dangerous, and the danger lessens as the water shoals, until on nearing the land its force is spent and harmless. On such a flat shore, the crew, handling the boat according to the rules already laid down, will keep her straight before or end on to the sea until she is fairly aground, when they may jump out to lighten her, and drag her in by her sides.
Upon a steep beach, on the other hand, it is the usual practice to row in at full speed, and, in the very act of landing, to turn the boat’s bow half round, so that the one big wave may throw her on her broadside up the beach, where plenty of help is usually at hand to haul her as quickly as possible out of the reach of the sea.
Digitized by LnOOQle
CHAPTER XXV.
WRECKING AND SALVING.
The Antiquity of “Wrecking ”—Old Wrecking Laws—The Bolte d'Oleron—Tho Now Act of George II. —The Danish Silver Robbery—Tho Golden Lion in Ballyheigue Bay—The Silver at Ballyheigue House—Arthur Crosbie—Beginnings of tho Plot—The Conspiracy Leaks Out—Lady Margaret Crosbie—Apathy of tho Danes—A Midnight Alarm and Robbery—A Miscarriage of Justice—The Case of tho Charming Jenny—Of tho Romulus—And of the Anna Hulk Hirn Boyr—Plucky Ronayne and tho Crow of the Gwenieea—Tho Rescue from tho Pit—The Man on tho Rocks—Cornish Wreckers—The Parson of St. Anthony—Mount’s Bay—The Other Side: Story of tho Bay of Panama—Salvage—Flotsam and Jetsam—Hovelling—The Aliion Lugger—Rich Salvage Jobs.
THE practice of “ wrecking,” though never perhaps held in the same high esteem as piracy upon the high seas, is probably quite as ancient In tho old days—say, in the thirteenth or fourteenth century—a rich vessel fled from port to port like a hunted beast. At sea she was never secure from attack, and, in Hallam’s words, “ neither restitution nor punishment of the criminals was to he obtained from Government, who sometimes feared the plunderer and sometimes connived at the offence.” As we know’, several of our most famous Elizabethan seamen were little better than legalised pirates. If the vessel escaped these and ran on shore, it was only to full into the hands of the wrecker, a “ land-rat,” who stood in about the same relation to that dashing sea-wolf, tho pirate, as a common sneak-thief to the highwayman of romance.
What were the old laws about wrecking, supposing that anyone regarded them ? To begin pretty far back, before the reign of Henry I., all wrecked property belonged to tho King. It is charitable to suppose that his Majesty ordained it thus in order to save his faithful subjects from the temptation to knock shipwrecked seamen on the head as a short way of succeeding to their property. But, whatever his intentions, they bore somewhat hardly upon the shipwrecked merchant, who might eomo struggling in upon a broken spar only to find that his valuable cargo, now strewing the coast, had passed out of his possession into that of the King.
1	Henry I. saw the iniquity of this, and decreed that neither wreck nor cargo should become the property of the Crown if any man of the crew escaped alive
Digitized by
Google
OLD “WRECKING" LAWS.
591
to shore. John, whose attention to nautical matters should be weighed against those peculiarities which displeased Mrs. Markham, expanded this law, and ordered, with some humour, that even if a beast came ashore alive, the wreck and goods should belong to the original owners. Even the proverbial cat with nine lives might thus preserve a cargo to her master—which may, indeed, bo the real foundation of the story of Whittington. Richard Coeur de Lion (who had travelled) ordered further “ that all persons escaping alive from a wreck should retain their goods; that wreck or wreckage should only be considered the property of the King when neither an owner nor the heir of a late owner could be found for it.” The theory has, indeed, been held that Richard, on his return from the Holy Land, was responsible for the famous rdles d'Oleron ; but these are quite certainly of a later date.
These laws, or judgments of Oleton, are a capitulary of ancient marine customs written in Old French, and bearing the name of Oleron for several
centuries, because tradition says they were originally drawn up in the island of that name that lies off the Charente. An ancient copy of these laws is to be found in the “ Black Book ” of the Admiralty, the original of which lies in the Bodleian Library; but they are not there called the laws of Oleron, nor is there any reference in the laws themselves to their origin or history. At
Digitized byTooele
592 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
any rate, they were about the first Merchant Shipping acts ever passed; formed the model of all the maritime codes in Europe; and remained in force (supplemented by a few explanatory statutes) till the reign of George IL And they bear eloquent witness to the usual fate of shipwrecked seamen at the time of the Crusades and after, as an extract or two will show.
. “An accursed custom prevailing in some parts, inasmuch as a third or fourth part of the wrecks that come ashore belong to the lord of the manor where the wrecks take place, and that pilots for profits from these lords and from the wrecks, like faithless and treacherous villains, do purposely run the ships under their care upon the rocks,” the law declares, “ that all false pilots shall suffer a most rigorous and merciless death, and be hung on high gibbets ”; while “ the wicked lords are to be tied to a post in the middle of their own houses, which shall be set on fire at all four corners, and burnt, with all that shall be therein, the goods being first confiscated for the benefit of the persons injured, and the site of the houses shall be converted into places for the sale of hogs and swine.” And again, " If people, more barbarous, cruel, and inhuman than mad dogs, murdered shipwrecked folk, they were to be plunged into the sea until half-dead, and then drawn out and stoned to death.” The pilot who negligently caused shipwreck was to make good the losses or lose his head; but the master and sailors, as a saving clause (principally for the owners!), must be persuaded that he had not the means to make good the loss before they cut off his head.”
Thus, or nearly thus, the law remained until the reign of George II.; and, unhappily, human nature, too, seems to have remained much the same. Otherwise there would hardly have been necessity for a new Act, bristling with threats. The preamble states: " That, notwithstanding the good salutary laws now in being against plundering and destroying vessels in distress and against taking away shipwrecked, lost, and stranded goods, still many wicked enonnities had been committed, to the disgrace of the nation ’’; and it was therefore enacted that death should be the penalty for hanging out false lights to lure vessels on shore; or for killing a shipwrecked person; or for stealing cargo or wreckage, whether anyone remained on board alive or not.
That prompt action of some kind had to be taken is proved by the true story which we are about to tell—the story of the Great Silver Robbery on the Kerry coast.
In the autumn of 1731 (the fifth year of George II.’s reign), a Danish East Indiaman, the Golden Lion, Captain Heitman, sailed from Copenhagen for Tranquebar, on the Madras coast, in those days a colony of Denmark. Her cargo included twelve large chests of silver—both bullion and coin—with sixty tons of iron and other valuables. The silver alone was reckoned at close on £16,000 sterling, or, to be accurate, £15,966 9s. 6d.
The Golden Lion met with very bad weather in the English Channel, and off the Land’s End was driven northward to the Kerry coast, where her
Digitized by LnOOQle
•THE HOGUES WERE COME" (p. M)k
38
Digitized by GOOQle
694
THE STORY OF THE SEA'
captain entered the Bay of Tralee. Now, near the northern shore of this bay, inside Keny. Head and above Fenit Isle, there lies a piece of water called the Bay of Ballyheigue, studded with sandbanks and sunken rocks on which the Atlantic rollers break heavily. Here, on the 28th of October, 1731, the captain of the Golden Lion found himself embayed. It is said that he was lured to this place by false lights from the shore. This has been disputed. The captain may have mistaken Kerry Head for Loop Head which marks the north side of the entrance of the Shannon, and so may have run into Ballyheigue Bay, thinking he was making the river, just as
many seamen have mistaken the Wolf light for the Lizard and run Mount’s Bay on the belief that they had the Channel clear ahead This may have been. The Irishmen claim that they were clear at of the guilt which lay so heavily on the coasts of Scotland and But their subsequent conduct was bad enough in any case.
ashore in of them, this time Cornwall-
Captain Heitman, finding himself in this fix and learning, either from charts, or from pilots, or on his own observation, that his only chance lay in making for a point where the rocks come down close to the sea and running his vessel ashore in comparatively deep water, managed to save not only the lives of his crew (nearly sixty all told), but the most valuable part of his cargo, including the twelve chests of silver. The vessel, of course, became a wreck. The rescued crew wore hospitably treated by the people of the neighbourhood. Captain Heitman, the chaplain, and the officers of the ship were invited to Ballyheigue House, the residence of Thomas Crosbie, Esq., a gentleman who had done good service on the night of the wreck. The seamen were billeted about in the farmhouses near, or in lodgings at Tralee or Ardfert. The captain and officers, of course, took charge of the treasure.
A word or two of description must be spared here for Ballyheigue House. It stood a short distance back from the sand-hills skirting the bay—a long, low thatched building, with large garden and orchards, and in front a great walled court with gates, which usually stood open. In the south-west corner of this court, and connected with the house by a wall about eighty feet long, stood an old square tower, two or three storeys in height, with vaults underneath it This tower had been a feudal keep, and the vault below was a dungeon, belonging to a French-Irish family named Cantclon or Cantillon. But, by intermarriage the Crosbies had' now become lords of the soil, and the Can til Ions had gone to settle elsewhere, although a few of their poor descendants were left in the neighbourhood, and the name of one of them will occur in our story. At the time this story opens, the upper rooms of the old tower were unused, and the ground floor occupied by a Mrs. Sandes, a poor relation of the Crosbie family.
The captain and officers of the Golden Lion were well entertained at Ballyheigue House. But the accommodation was scanty, and after a time, pending an answer to the dispatches they had at once sent to London and
Digitized by Google
THE DANISH SILVER BOBBERY.
595
Copenhagen informing the Danish authorities of their case, they asked leave to occupy the disused rooms in the upper part of the old tower, and to store the chests of silver in the vault beneath. Thomas Crosbie readily gave his consent, and accordingly they moved themselves and their treasure to these new quarters, and, having stored the silver in the cellar, divided themselves into watches, so that three armed Danes kept watch over it night and day.
There is reason now to doubt if the Danish captain’s dispatches ever got beyond the neighbourhood of Ballyhcigue. In those days there were no public mails from such an out-of-the-way spot, and communication with the great towns was difficult and uncertain. On the other hand, news of the wreck and the treasure she brought would spread about the country-side from mouth to mouth like wildfire.
The Danes, however, had no cause for suspicion at first. All went well until the winter, when their good-natured host, Thomas Crosbie, died. He had exposed himself too rashly on the night of the wreck, and this had hastened, if it did not bring about, his end. His widow and his mother were left executors under the will, and these called in the help of a distant relative, one Arthur Crosbie. This Arthur Crosbie was not a pleasant person. He was a needy man, to begin with; he was also a sly man and a busybody. Almost his first business was to advise the widow and mother to make claim on Captain Heitman for £4,000 for salvage and costs. Captain Heitman thought this excessive, and managed to get a letter to the authorities at Dublin complaining of the charge. A message came back to Tralee that the Danes were to be protected against imposition. So far, so good; but it did not make matters pleasant at Ballyhcigue House, where Arthur Crosbie now spent half his time. This man could not see why the Danes should not be .made to pay up while they kept so much money guarded in the vault below the tower. He began to plot, and, unhappily, other people in the neighbourhood began to plot.
Among the low mutterings and whisperings of an ignorant country folk, it is not easy to say at what precise point a plot started But it seems pretty certain that the train was fired by a tenant on the Bally heigue estate, a man bearing the old and bad name of Cantillon—bad, because a Cantillon, and one of the same family was tho man named in the .great Napoleon’s will as the recipient of a pension for having attempted to assassinate the Duke of Wellington. A descendant of this dirty scoundrel was made a baron by Louis Philippe, and took “ Baron de Ballyhcigue ” for his title.
Cantillon of the Kerry farm, worthy cousin of this would-be assassin, began by consulting with one David Lawlor, an innkeeper of Tralee. By the spring their plans were ripening, and one morning in March or the beginning of April this precious pair walked over to the farm of Beinaree, belonging to the Rev. Francis Lauder. Protestant Archdeacon of Ardfert, and justice of the peace.
Digitized by
Google
596 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
(It will be seen how well his Reverence combined these two offices.) They found a number of men threshing com in a barn, with one Francis Ryan superintending, who was tithe-proctor and steward to the Archdeacon. They called Ryan out, and in the course of a stroll over the farm, told him what they had in mind. He was quick enough to join in the plot. The three men walked back to the barn, and after chatting a bit with the threshers, Cantillon and Lawlor left for home.
That same night, Ryan took one of the threshers, John Kevane, aside, told him there was a plan to rob the Danish treasure, and begged him to join in it and get some of his kinsfolk to do the same. Kevane said, cautiously, that it was a big job, and asked if any of the gentlemen of tho county were in it. To this Ryan ’gave no direct reply, but said he intended to consult his toaster, the Archdeacon, and that "he felt sure all the gentlemen of the county would consent to it." For the moment Kevane was not persuaded, and Ryan, having let the secret out, had another try with him. This time Kevane said that if the gentry were really in the plot, one or two of them ought to appear in it, "so as to spirit up the people.” Ryan answered that it would hardly do to appear, but their servants were to assist in taking the treasure. Hearing this, Kevane consented to do the same. Meanwhile, Cantillon and Lawlor were boating up recruits. They soon managed to draw into tho conspiracy Richard Ball, the steward, and William Banner, the butler, at Ballyheigue, and a certain Stephen Macmahon, who kept a little shop in the village and owned a vessel that plied between Dunkirk and the Irish coast, and no doubt did a little smuggling when chance offered. This skipper, again, brought his trusty servant, John Malony, into the plot.
The numbers by this time ought to have sufficed. But Cantillon was still anxious to drag in one Denis Cahane, tenant of a small holding at Kilgobbin, on the south-west shore of Tralee Bay. This Cahane was a poor man. At first he would not listen to Cantillon. But the temptation was strong, and he asked time to consider. Cantillon agreed, and promised to come back at an appointed time for his answer. Cahane, being much distressed in mind, and having been told that all tho gentry were mixed up in the plot, resolved to consult his landlord, Mr. John Carrick, of Glandine, the principal proprietor in those parts, and a magistrate. Mr. Carrick strongly warned him against lending himself to such a crime. Cahane promised to have nothing to do with it, but begged Mr. Carrick to keep the matter secret, or his life would be in danger as an informer. Cantillon was coming for his answer next Sunday evening. This was the 16th of May, and that morning the Protestant clergyman, who had ridden over from Tralee to perform the service at Kilgobbin, was accosted after service by the distressed Cahane, who said he had “ something weighing on his mind, and would like to make a confession”: he added that the Vicar must promise secrecy. In his anxiety to relieve the poor fellow’s mind, the Vicar did so, and thereupon Cahane poured out his story. Exhorting him on
Digitized by Goode
WARNINGS OF A CONSPIRACY.
597
no account to have any share in the plot, the Vicar again promised secrecy as to his name: but resolved, like a humane and sensible man, to use the information to prevent a dastardly crime.
Early next morning, therefore, he called on Cahane’s landlord, Mr. Carrick, and begged him, as a friend of Lady Margaret Crosbie, to hasten at once to Ballyheigue House, and inform her of the plot. Landlord Carrick—if we put the most charitable interpretation on his conduct—appears to have been a pusillanimous idiot. Remember that he had already been in possession of the facts for some days. He now promised to go to Ballyheigue the next day, which was May the 18th. Next day some small matter of business turned up, and he put the visit off. This would not do for the Vicar. He posted off that very morning to Ballyheigue, and laid the story before Lady Margaret. Lady Margaret assured him that she would warn the Danes, and advise them
to remove the chests of silver from the tower to her house
“THE SAVAGES HUSHED DOWS " ( p. COO).
for greater security. Before the
week was out, rumours were flying about the country-side that an attack was to be made on the Danish treasure. A message even came to Captain
Digitized by
Google
598 THE STOHY OF THE SEA.
Heitman from tho Custom House at Tralee, advising him to apply for a guard of soldiers from the Tralee Barracks; but, for some reason or other, this precaution was neglected. Captain Heitman did, indeed, send twice to Lady Margaret to ask for some of the firearms that had been in the ship, and also for some powder and balls; but his request was refused. He also asked that he might have the ground-floor room of the tower (occupied, as we have said, by Mrs. Sandes, the poor relation), in order to have all his men together. This request, also, was refused. The reader by this time is beginning to guess that Lady Margaret herself was in the plot. There seems no doubt about it As for the information given to hor by the Vicar, she merely kept it to herself
The apathy of the Danes, however, was incredible. As early as the last week in May, Richard Ball, the steward, a leaky conspirator, had told one of them that robbers would certainly come and take away the chests of silver, and that they would come through the garden and over the wall into the bowling-green, and thence into the courtyard where the tower stood, John Suchdorf, the Dano to whom this was told, seems to have thought it only a bad joke on the part of Richard Ball.
In the first week of June some guests came to spend a few days at Bally-heigue House. These included the wife of John Blennerhasset, a well-known member of tho Irish Parliament, and tho wife of John’s brother, Thomas Blennerhasset, who himself joined the party on the 4th of June. That same afternoon, about 5 o’clock, our obtuse friend, John Suchdorf, saw three men —one of whom he afterwards identified as Lawlor—hanging about at the foot of the tower, and saw Lawlor leave his companion and enter the door of Lady Margaret’s house. Again, about 7 in the evening, he saw Ball and Matony and three or four other people standing together and talking very earnestly at the foot of the tower. But he seems to have attached no importance to this.
All the guests assembled to dinner as usual that afternoon, and the Danish officers who lived in the house were invited. Conversation was brisk, and the guests only separated a little before midnight. All had retired to rest, however, when, soon after midnight, a loud alarm filled the house, from the firing of guns, shouts, and uproar coming from the tower across the court Captain Heitman hastily flung on his clothes and rushed downstairs to the hall, where he found the guests and most of tho servants of the house already gathered. Calling out that his silver was being stolen, and begging them to assist him in repelling the robbers, he begun to pull buck the bolts of the door, when Lady Margaret Crosbie threw herself before him, and begged him to remain where he was as ho would certainly be killed What bad happened in tho tower, meanwhile, may be gathered from the deposition afterwards made by our friend John Suchdorf:—
“In the night between the 4th and the Sth days of June he, this Informant, being in the turret aforesaid in bed, together with Alexander Foster, and fast asleep, Andreas Peterson,
Digitized byVrOOQlC
A NIGHT ALARM, AND THE SEQUEL.
599
about 12 of the clock, came to the bedside wounded and bleeding, and badc this Informant and the said Foster get up, saying the rogues were come and had already killed Laurence Marcusson and Erasmus Nilsen, who, together with him, were sentries at the gate. Whereupon this Informant, said Alexander Foster, Peter Mingard, and George Jenesen, who all lay in the same room, arose, and, having first fastened the street door, went up into an uppermost room, where out of a window the Informant saw a great multitude, whose faces were blacked, in the courtyard ; but this Informant and his companions having no more anus than a case of pistols and one gun amongst them all, and no powder or ball for a second charge (all their firclocks, which were a great many, being secured on their first landing by Thomas Crosbie, Esq., lately deceased), they did not think it would be of any service to them to fire so few shots, besides which, they apprehended it might be a moans to have them murdered, not being able to make any further resistance. This Informant further smith that to the best of his knowledge be heard the voice of John JIalony, servant to Stephen Macmahon, who had lived for a considerable time before, as he then did, in the said house of Ballyheigue, with whom this Informant was well acquainted, amongst the persons that carried away the chests, and believes ho likewise heard the voice of Thomas Crosbie, commonly called Thomas Godly, amongst them."
Every preparation had been made for carrying off the silver. The Venerable Archdeacon Lauder, Justice of the Peace, had sent his chaise and horses, and these stood ready at one of the gates of the courtyard. Three of the chests were put into the chaise and galloped off to Beinaree farm, and there in the Archdeacon’s orchard, split open and the silver divided. One chest was carried to Tralee, and there seized by Colonel Arthur Denny with his soldiers. This made the robbers cautions. Two chests were taken to Ballingown and there hidden. The remaining six were left at Ballyheigue, to be shared among tho principal conspirators. Steward Ball, who presided over the division, announced that about half the treasure must be set aside for Lady Margaret and the Crosbie family-.
The rest of the story does hardly more credit to tho neighbourhood than the part we have already told. The Danes offered a tenth part of the treasure to anyone who would give information leading to its recovery. Colonel Denny did his utmost to hunt down the criminals, and several of tho gentry and magistrates helped him. But the most of them were apathetic. After a few weeks, nine or ten of the gang were caught and lodged in Tralee Gaol; and three of these were found , guilty' at the next summer assize. One of the prisoners was hanged, the second killed himself in prison on the evening before the day fixed for his execution. The third was pardoned at tho request of Captain Heitman, under the belief that he could put them on tho track of the money. Some of the remaining prisoners were allowed to turn King's evidence. The trials of the rest dragged on from assize to assize, the judges allowing bail with great complaisance, until everybody was tired of the business. As late as Michaelmas, 1735, the unfortunate Heitman and some of his officers were kicking their heels in Dublin in the vain hope of getting their money back. But of tho whole treasure only about £4,000 was ever recovered. It was supposed that a great part of it had been carried off to Dunkirk, probably in Malony’s ship. It seems that the Danish Embassy
Digitized by
Google
600 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
remonstrated with King George upon this monstrous miscarriage of justice, and His Majesty apologised; but no adequate punishment ever befel the chief conspirators.
Let us move on to the year 1774, when under the heading “Lent Circuit,” the Annual Register reports that:—“At Shrewsbury Assizes, bills of indictment were preferred by Captain Chiloot, late of the Charming Jenny, against three opulent inhabitants of the Isle of Anglesea, one of whom is said to be possessed of a considerable estate, and to have offered five thousand pounds-bail, in order to their being tried at the next assizes on a charge of piracy, when the bilk were found. It appeared that on the 11th of September, 1773, in very bad weather, in consequence of false lights being discovered, the captain bore for shore, when his vessel, whose cargo was valued at £19,000, went to pieces, and all the crew, except the captain and his wife, perished, the latter being brought on shore on a portion of the wreck. Nearly exhausted they lay for some time, till the savages of the adjacent places rushed down upon them. The lady was just able to lift a handkerchief up to her head when her husband was torn from her side. They cut the buckles from his shoes, and deprived him of every covering. Happy toescape with his life, he hastened to the beach in search of his wife, when, horrible to relate, her half-naked and plundered corpse presented itself to his view. What to do Captain Chilcot was at a loss. Providence, however, conducted him to the roof of a venerable pair, who bestowed upon him every assistance. The captain’s wife, it seems, at the time the ship went to pieces, had two bank-bills of a considerable value and seventy guineas in her pocket. At the Summer Assizes at Salop, Robert and Parry, two of the above-named, were found guilty of plundering the Charming Jenny, but, their counsel pleading an arrest of judgment, sentence was. suspended. Eventually one was executed, and one had his sentence commuted.”
Again, under the entry "January 8th, 1811,” there occurs a report which, seems to show that the protestations made in the case of the Danish silver robbery, that wrecking was foreign to the Irish character, are hardly supported by fact:—“ Another daring attempt was made by a party of country people at Clonderalaw Bay ’’—situated, we may remark, but a few miles from Ballyheigue— “ to take possession of the American ship Romulus on this day. They assembled at about 10 in the evening, to the amount of about two or three hundred, and commenced a firing of musketry, which they kept up at intervals for three hours; when, finding a steady resistance from the crew, and guard of yeomanry which had been put on the vessel on her first going on shore, they retired. The shot they fired appeared to be cut from square bars of lead about half an inch in diameter. One of these miscreants dropped, and was carried away by his companions.”
Digitized byVrOOQlC
INHUMAN WRECKERS.
601
The following is an extract from a letter:—
“On Friday, the 27th of October, 1811, the galliott Anna Hulk KIm Royr, Meinerty, master, from Christian Sound, laden with deals, for Killala, was driven on shore at a place called Porturlin, between Killala and Broadhaven. The captain and crew providentially saved their lives by jumping on shore on a small island or rock. At this time the stern
WKECKBHS.
and quarter were stove in. The crew remained two hours on the rock, when they were taken off by a boat and brought to the mainland. Shortly after, the captain’s trunk, with all the sailors’ clothes in general, came on shore, when the country people immediately began to plunder, leaving the unfortunate wreck, and cut away everything they could come at of the sails, rigging, etc., while hundreds were taking away the deals to all parts of the country. Though the captain s|oke good English, and most pitifully inquired to
Digitized by Tooele
602
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
whom he might apply for assistance, yet lie could not hear of any for fourteen hours when he was told that Major Denis Bingham was the nearest and only person he could apply to. With much difficulty he procured a guide, and proceeded to Mr. Bingham’s, a distance of twenty miles through the mountains. In the meantime, after thirty-six hours concealment of this very melancholy circumstance, Captain Morris, of the Townskead cruiser, who lay at Broad haven, a distance of about ten miles from the wreck, heard of it, and, approaching it, landed with twenty men, well armed. In coming near the wreck he first tired in the air, in order to disperse the peasantry, which had no effect; he therefore ordered his men to fire close, which had the desired effect, when he immediately pursued them into the interior, from three to five miles' distance, dividing his party in different directions, when, by great exertion and fatigue, they saved about 1,800 deals and a remnant of the wreck. Captain Morris had some of the robbers taken, but his party being so. scattered, they were rescued by a large mob of the country. The unfortunate captain and crew were taken by Captain Morris on board his cutter, where they got a change of clothing, and were taken every possible earo of.”
We have given but a few extracts from a long list. But times have altered, and it is only fair that we should illustrate the other, and fur more pleasing, side of the Irish character.
Some twelve miles west of Tramore, on the coast of Waterford, there lies a poor farmhouse, which in 1875 was occupied by a man called John Ronayne, with his wife and family of twelve children. It was but a poor shanty, consisting of but two rooms—a sleeping room and a kitchen, the latter apartment being shared by the pig. Rather less than half a mile from the farm lies the rugged shore, approached by a muddy “ boreen,” or narrow lane, emerging on the cliff near the course of a stream which, throughout the winter and spring, is a roaring torrent. Before this torrent joins the sea it plunges down a crevice, narrow and deep and deadly. The inhabitants of the coast well know’ this treacherous hole, and warn the traveller to beware of it; for, once in it, he will find no return.
A hundred yards or so from the cove into which this impetuous torrent pours, two tall ridges of rock guard the entrance, with but a dozen yards of foaming water between them. Skilful the steersman must be, and bold the skipper, who would dare this narrow channel, even though it were the only ono by which they might hope to beach their sinking ship. And yet, on one wild night in January, 1875, a large vessel, built but a few weeks before, and now bound from Falmouth to Glasgow, successfully ran through the passage; not that any skill was shown, for not a man on board knew they were near the shore; but, as they drove blindly on before the gale, chance brought them safely through—but only to destroy them. In another instant they crashed on the rocky shore, and in an incredibly short space of time tho good ship Gwenissa was but a heap of wreckage scattered on the surf.
Tho family at Killeton Farm were sleeping while this tragedy was enacted. One or two of the boys had thought they heard cries of distress; but after listening awhile and hearing nothing but the raving of the wind, they thought their ears must have played them false, and so went off to bed. Ronayne,
Digitized by LnOOQle
GALLANT RONAYNE.
603
however, had not been long in bed, when a loud knocking awoke him. Jumping up, he opened the door, and there, on the threshold, stood three men in sailors’ clothes.
After the first hurried words of surprise, Ronayne heaped up the turf fire, and, as the men warmed themselves, learned that they alone of the crew of the Gwenivtut, nine in all, were certainly saved. But there was a chance, they said, that one or two might yet be alive.
This was enough for Ronayne. He hurried on his clothes, snatched up a large sod of flaming turf by way of a lantern, and rushed down the borcen to the cove. Here he made his way cautiously to the edge of the stream, whence he now heard the shouts of several men. Following up their cries, ho soon came upon a man in a most dangerous position.
Ronayne blew the turf until it glowed brightly, and, holding it down, saw a man waist-deep in the water, but so jammed between the crags that it was impossible for him to move, far less to climb the overhanging rocks. The poor fellow, too, was bruised and half-stunned, Ronayne saw at a glance that the only way to help him was to go down himself, extricate him from the rocks that held him fast, and then assist him to climb out of the valley. This, by means of much pulling and hauling, he at length managed to do. Leading him to a place of safety, Ronayne left him there, and ran off towards the others, who had never ceased calling from the moment of his arrival. They were four in number, and, as far as he could judge in the darkness, they lay in the very gorge down which the torrent plunged; and so, indeed, it proved. One was hanging to a spar which had become jammed across the rocks; another grasped a projecting crag, and thus contrived to keep afloat. Tho others, more fortunate, had been thrown upon a ledge, where they clung in comparative safety, though they wore waist-deep in water. But, though more secure than their companions, they were quite as helpless; for the rock rose sheer above them, and defied all their efforts to climb it. Here Ronayne’s knowledge stood him in good stead, and after much active assistance in the shape of climbing, swimming, pulling, and scrambling, he succeeded in rescuing one after another, each assisting afterwards to make the task easier. One of the men had his leg broken, and all were more or less bruised and perishing from cold and exposure. Still, here were five men saved from death by his perseverance and bravery. And three men were up at the house. But where was the other ?—for these made but eight, and there had been nine on board the Gwenifisa.
Leaving the rescued men in the lane, Ronayne ran again to the cove, and a dim spark showed him where he had left his turf lantern. He scraped ofl’ the ash, and, the wind fanning it, again it burned up brightly—too brightly, for now it burned down to his frozen fingers. But he only grasped it the tighter, and ran along the shore, searching in every cleft and hollow, and shouting as he ran. At length, a faint cry rewarded him; more a moan than
Digitized by Goode
604
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
a cry, and at a distance. Rapidly he scanned the beach and searched along the cliffs, and still at intervals his shouts were answered by a faint cry, but always from far away. No doubt the man was out on the rocks, to which he
"JAMMED BETWEEN THE CHAOS ' O'- 603).
had been swept by a receding wave after the ship struck, and Ronayne knew that further help must be got before he could be reached. So he hurried back to the five men he had left in the lane, and they all proceeded to the farmhouse, carrying the helpless man between them.
The farmhouse reached, Ronayne at once started off, wet and weary as he was, and ran to the coastguard station at Bonmahon, where he gave information
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE CHEW OF THE GWEN1SSA.
605
of the wreck, and demanded help for the poor fellow out on the rocks. The coastguard lost no time in turning out with the rocket apparatus, and followed him down to the shore; but, just as they were fixing the rocket in position, Ronayne, who had been hunting about, came upon the very last and ninth man of the crew, lying half in the water and half out, upon the beach and in a tangle of wreckage. Ronayne had at first rightly guessed his position on the rocks; but, while the coastguard was being fetched, he had been washed ashore, with shattered limbs—bruised, helpless, unconscious—but alive. The poor man was, carried to the farm, where some old whiskey jars were filled with hot water and placed against his feet. The little whiskey in the house was divided among the benumbed men, and some food also set before them.
And now Ronayne’s house contained over twenty inmates, most of them standing round the turf fire, wringing the water from their clothes and
warming their frozen limbs; the few beds, too, had their occupants. For Ronayne the work had but barely commenced. Saddling his young mare, he started to lay information of the wreck before Lloyd’s Deputy-Receiver at Tramore, some twelve miles distant, for eight shillings were to be earned, and for this trifling reward he was prepared to ride some twenty-four miles on a cold winter night
Digitized by GOOQle
606
THE STORY OF THE SEA,
On his road, he passed the doctor’s house, and sent him to attend the injured men, arriving at Tramorc a few minutes before the telegram from the coastguard station. Two of tho sailors were afterwards removed to the hospital, and recovered, and they and the remainder cared for by the Shipwrecked Mariners’ Society’s agents. Ronayne was indemnified for any expense he had incurred by the same Society, and the Lifeboat Institution shortly after rewarded him.
Times have, indeed, changed in this respect; changed since the days when Pope wrote of the waves—
“Then full against his Cornish lands they roar, And two rich shipwrecks bless the lucky shore;”
changed since 1811, when the remnant of a poor crew of a frigate, wrecked on the Scotch coast, were, after struggling ashore for dear life, murdered on the beach for the sake of their wretched clothes; changed, even, since 1817, when the Norwegian brig BergMa struck on the Cefr-Sidau Sands in Carmarthen Bay, and hundreds of men aud women lay drunk and insensible about the beach, having broached ail but one hundred out of two hundred and sixty-six pipes and casks of wine. “ A century ago,” says Cyrus Redding, “ in the superstitious days, when, according to vulgar belief, the clergyman of the parish had his familiar spirit, the plunder of wrecks might have been made a charge with greater justice, but the very rumour now that any man had been guilty of such atrocity would expel him from society in Cornwall, and from the county itself.”
A tolerably well-known yarn is, however, told of the parson of St Anthony, Cornwall. He was preaching a sermon against wrecking, and divided his warning into three heads. “ In the first place, my brothers, it brings our souls into jeopardy. Secondly, it leads to fighting with the next parish, and we are smaller than they. Thirdly, it is so disappointing. As often as not, the cargo is spoiled. For these reasons------”
The parson at this point looked up and out of the window, and, from his elevated position in the pulpit, saw what his congregation could not see—a fine ship driving on tho sunken rock at the entrance of Gillan’s Creek. Raising his left hand impressively, and with right hand quietly tucking up his surplice, he went on—
“ My brethren, let us struggle to resist temptation ’ ”
Then, with a hand on the pulpit door—
“ But, if we cannot manage that, at least let us start fair! ”
And taking tho pulpit stairs at two bounds, he was out at the door with the foremost.
The fact is, we must distinguish between two kinds of wrecking. The greater villainy, which led men to fasten a lantern to a horse’s head and load
Digitized by GOOQle
THE NATURAL MAN.
607
it about on the top of the cliffs, so that the bewildered mariner, mistaking it for the light of another ship, might shape his course for the rocks, has long ago perished out of the land. But that sort of wrecking which is confined to the pilfering of shipwrecked property cannot even yet be said to be obsolete. Writing in 1817, the Rev. G. C. Smith, of Penzance, formerly an officer in the Royal Navy, says of the little village of Predannack: “ Our friends in H----- have lately begun preaching here, but they want help ; this is a most excellent station for an itinerant; it lies in the parish of Mullyon, about four miles from the Lizard. There is no preaching whatever in this village, and there are some who cannot walk far out of it. The neighbourhood is sadly infested with the wreckers. When the news of a wreck flies round the coast, thousands of people are instantly collected near the fatal spot; pickaxes, hatchets, crowbars, and ropes, are their usual implements for breaking up and carrying off whatever they can. The moment the vessel touches the shore she is considered fair plunder, and men, women, and children arc working on her, to break her up, night and day. The precipices they descend, the rocks they climb, and the billows they buffet, to seize the floating fragments, are the most frightful and alarming I ever beheld; the hardships they endure ''especially the women) in winter to save all they can are almost incredible. Should a vessel laden with wine and spirits approach the shore, she brings certain death and ruin to many with her. The rage and fighting to stave in the casks and bear away the spoil, in kettles and all manner of vessels, is brutal and shocking. Last winter we had some dreadful scenes of this description. A few in this neighbourhood, it seems, having a little more light than others, scrupled to visit a wreck, that came on shore last winter, on a Lord's Day, lest it should be breaking the Sabbath; but they gathered all their implements into a public-house, and waited until the clock struck twelve; at midnight, therefore, they rushed forth, all cheeks of conscience being removed.”
Even within the past five and thirty years, it is said that a Parliamentary candidate, while canvassing in a district near the coast, found that his opinion on the subject of wrecking was made a crucial point. In December, 1868, when the North Britain went ashore near St. Michael’s Mount, the Vicar of Mullyon heard his parishioners remark, “ Pity she went so far into the bay. What do they in to Penzance want of a wreck in there ? If she’d come in here, she might have done some good! ” Indeed, wrecking of this kind seems to have held very much the same position in popular ethics as smuggling; and a wrecker has been known to defend himself seriously on the ground that “ charity begins at home.” We are told, too, that the natives of Schleswig-Holstein considered wrecking so legitimate that prayers were at one time offered up in their churches that " their coasts might be blessed.” The parson, however, it was explained, did not really pray for wrecks. What he desired was, that if there must be wrecks, those wrecks might happen on their coasts. A Mr. D. Mackinnen, who made a tour through the West Indies in the present
Digitized by LnOOQle
608
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
century, " interviewed ” some of the licensed pilots of the Bahamas. Asking one of these men what success they had had lately, he was told that there had been about forty sail of pilots along the Florida coast for four months. He remarked that they must have rendered great service to the crews wrecked in
that dangerous passage. The pilot said, "No; they generally 'went on' in the
night.” “ But could not you light up beacons on shore ? ” “ No, no,” said the man, laughing, “we always put them out for a better chance by night.” “But
it would have been more humane--------” “ I did not go there for humanity. I went racking!”
We told a story just now. as a foil to those dealing with Irish wreckers. Let us do as much for the Cornishmen.
At 1.30 A.M. on Tuesday, March 10th, 1891—the night of the great blizzard in the West—the four-masted steel ship Bay of Panama, of London, 2,282 tons register, went ashore at Penare . Point, by Gillan's Creek, close to the place where the apocryphal Vicar of St. Anthony called to his parishioners " to start fair.” This vessel, owned by the Bullock’s Bay Line, was from Calcutta, with a cargo of 17,000 bales of jute for Dundee. The captain, David Wright, his wife, all but one of the six officers, four apprentices, and six of 'the
coastguard signalling.	crew, were cither frozen to death
in the rigging or drowned. 'This made a loss of eighteen lives out of a company of about forty all told.
' At the village of St. Keverne, not far from Penare Point, it became known at about noon on Tuesday that a wreck had occurred at the mouth of the Helford River, and from there the first news of what had occurred was con-
veyed into Falmouth, with great courage, and in the face of tremendous difficulties, by Mr. J. H. James, of Old Vicarage, St. Keverne. At 1 o’clock, Mr. James started on his pony for Holston in the midst of a terrible snowstorm. His intention was to telegraph to Falmouth, but all the wires were down, and communication was impossible except on foot. This he undertook, and, by dauntless perseverance, at length accomplished; but his experiences during the journey are among the most thrilling personal incidents connected with the gale. After proceeding for about two miles, he could only get along by crawling on his hands and knees through the snow, and his face had
Digitized by
Google
SALVAGE.
89
Digitized by GOOQle
610
THE STOIiY OF THE SEA.
become coated with snow, and icicles hung from his ears. He at last found shelter at a wayside cottage, and at daybreak next morning again set out, reaching Falmouth at 9 o’clock, and giving information to Messrs, Broad and Sons, who sent out steamers to the scene of the wreck. The Bay oj Panama was discovered with her head to the north, broadside on to the sea, and jammed under the Nare Head, close against the cliff. Her mainmast was gone; and the sea was making clean breaches right over her. Fortunately for the survivors clinging to the stranded ship, before Mr. James had started on : his adventurous journey to Falmouth, on Tuesday morning, the rocket apparatus, , in charge of the coastguard, who were aroused by Mr. Nicholls, of Pcnare, had reached the scene from Helford. The first rocket fired threw a line right over . the ship, and within fifteen minutes the whole of the survivors were safely on shore. Chief Boatman Fisher, of the coastguard, went on board the vessel after ' the hands were taken off, to sec if anyone was left alive, but his self-sacrifice was without result. Accounts of survivors, including those of Mr. Fred Evans, boatswain’s mate, Mr, Charles Higgins, quartermaster, and Mr. Beresford, apprentice, relate that the Bay of Panama was one hundred and eleven days from Calcutta when she struck. There had been forty-two days of severe weather before reaching the western end of the English Channel, and here severe snowstorms and heavy squalls were encountered. At 11.30 on Sunday night they sighted a light, and, being in a position of danger, they burned several blue lights, the captain thinking the light came from a steamer. The vessel was now drifting to leeward without a stitch of canvas on her, and the captain soon expressed the opinion that they were to leeward of the Lizard, and clear of all land. At 12.30 the watch went below, put on some clean clothes, and got into their bunks. The captain remained on deck, his wife being in her cabin.
Within an hour from this time the ship struck, and began rapidly to till. Most of those who had been below went forward, though the forecastle had been burst in, and was flooded. Seas were breaking over the vessel, and nearly all the officers were early swept away. The second officer went to fetch a rocket, and was never seen again. Attempts were mode to get a line on shore, and one seaman is said to have volunteered to swim the distance; but the former was found impracticable, and, in the latter case, the other seamen held their comrade back. Some of the crew took refuge in the rWnH' and at daybreak the second quartermaster died there; the mate died an hour after, and the boatswain, in a state of delirium, jumped from the mizzen-top into the sea, and was drowned. Just before 6 o’clock in the morning, the after-end of the ship broke in two, the mainmast having previously fallen. It is said that, at the time the rescuing party arrived on the scene, six men were frozen in the rigging. The survivors were taken to St. Kcveme Farm, which they reached at 10.30 on Tuesday morning, and where they were kindly treated. They remained there until 4 in the
Digitized by Goode
SALVAGE.
611
afternoon, when they were conveyed to Gweek in a ’bus. From here it was absolutely necessary for them to walk to Falmouth through the snow, and, as many of them were thinly clad and had no boots, their trials were not over until Falmouth was reached, where Messrs. Jewell and Burton, and Mr. and Mrs. Weir, of the Royal Cornwall Sailors’ Home, treated them all with the kindness and attention they so much needed. Most of the bodies from the Bay of Panama were recovered, that of the captain’s wife having been found lying on the shore early on the morning of the wreck.
The question of Salvage is rather too technical for these pages. Roughly, we may give the following definitions:—
A wreck, in our law, signifies such goods as, after a shipwreck, are cast upon the land and left there; for they are not wrecks within the jurisdiction of the Admiralty so long as they remain at sea. By the Merchant Shipping Act, which, in 1854, revised and codified most of the laws relating to shipping, the ultimate owner of a wreck is (as before) the S'- i -n, or lord of a manor to whom a grant of wreck has been made; and r being in the custody of the Receiver of Wrecks for a year and a da shipwrecked goods are not claimed, the proceeds of the sale, less the ai >f the salvage, are paid to the Crown or the lord of the manor, as the c; .- lie.
Goods which are cast from a wrecked ship into the sea, and then sink and remain under water, are called jetsam, (or “ thrown ” goods) unless when seamen in danger of shipwreck throw the goods into the sea with a cork or buoy attached to mark the place, so that they may be found again. Goods found floating on the sea after a ship has sunk or been cast away are called flotsam. Derelict is the term applied to goods wilfully forsaken or left, or cast ashore above high-water mark.
Salvage is that reasonable compensation to which persons are entitled who save a ship or cargo from Toss or peril at sea. There is no fixed amount of salvage. What is reasonable has to be determined with reference to the circumstances. As a rule, salvors are not too generously paid, nor do the authorities in many cases offer proper encouragement to fishermen and others to lie honest. When the Jonkheer Meester Van de Wall, a Dutch East Indiaman, went ashore near tho Lizard, some fishermen from Penberth Cove, across the bay, while engaged in fishing up blocks of tin, which had formed part of the ship’s cargo, found a tin box lying in six-fathom water. Being opened, it was found to contain coins and bank-notes to the value of £12,000 or £13,000. They at once brought the box and its contents ashore, and handed them up to the authorities. They claimed, and afterwards received, their salvage portion, which, in this ease, happened to be fixed by law at one-third. But, from the time they brought the box on shore, they were placed, as a reward for their honesty, under strict supervision, and accompanied by a coastguard whenever they went afloat. Again, when the unfortunate Schiller was
Digitized by LnOOQle
612
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
wrecked off the Scilly Islands, many bodies of drowned passengers and seamen were picked up by the fishing-boats for some time after. Upon some of them money and valuables were found, and these were given up to the Customs when the body was sent on shore. In these cases, the valuables were kept for the friends of the drowned persons, and an uniform reward of five shillings was paid to the finders. That is to say, for the sake of taking such a body ashore, the fishermen must lose a night's fishing, and receive at most a sum of sevenpence per man. If they brought home the valuables, and contented themselves with sinking the body, they were reproached for inhumanity. It can hardly be wondered at, therefore, if now and then a crew, coming across a body, chose to shut their eyes and sail by towards the fishing grounds.
Yet there are any number of men along our coasts who support themselves,
“a tin box” (p. 6UX
at any rate during the winter months, by salvage. Visitors to Ramsgate, or similar southern watering-places, will remember the luggers in which holiday excursions arc made. In the winter, these boats—" hovellers ” they are called —put out, especially in rough weather, on the chance of meeting with a ship that requires assistance. Unlike the lifeboat, these do not work for charity alone; on the contrary, they go out to earn their living, and a hardly-earned living it in
Digitized by
Google
HOVELLING.
613
The hovelling lugger carries, as a rule, a crew of ten men, and these receive no regular pay. Any salvage or reward they may earn is commonly divided into fourteen shares: the boat takes three and a half for the owners, half a share goes for provisions, and each man of the crew receives one share.
Sometimes they will fall in with a vessel that has lost an anchor and
HOVElXtM AT WOKE.
(From a Drawing by W. L. Wyllie. A Ji. A.)
chain and wants them replaced. The hoveller then puts about for the shore, obtains what is needed, and returns with it to the distressed vessel In the old days, when hundreds of ships used to bring up in the Downs, there was a good deal of this anchor and chain business. But now, as steam drives out sails, a homeward-bound ship will take a tug at Dungeness and be towed right up to the docks, while an outward-bound ship will be towed from the Thames well down Channel,
As an example of tliis particular kind of work, we may take the case of the Albion lugger. Sho put out from Deal and met a vessel driving before the gale, having lost both her anchors and cables, received orders to supply new anchors from shore, and beat back for Deal through a heavy sea. Arriving at the beach, the crew hod the utmost difficulty in baling the
Digitized by^OOQlC
614
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
lugger, hauling her up, and turning her round, head to the sea. This was done at last, and the leading hands hurried away to inquire about an anchor and cable. The agents supplied them with such as seemed suitable, weighing in all about seven tons—no small weight to get on board. They were quickly ready for sea, however; the signal was given, tho boat ran down the steep ways, and was launched again. But, meanwhile, the gale had rapidly increased. A breaking wave curbs over the bow of the boat as she rushes in, and fills her. For a moment the Albion runs under water, then her stern conies round, and she is lifted and flung broadside on the beach. In a moment the crew— fifteen of them—are struggling in the surf Tiie spectators on the beach manage to save the whole of them, though one poor fellow is insensible before they pull him out. And now the rescued men can do nothing but watch their fine boat, worth five hundred pounds, being torn and hammered to pieces in the surf, until sho parts in two, and the anchor and cable fall through her. .
At other times, the hoveliers will find a ship ashore; and then, if they can help her, they come in for a certain amount of salvage; or, again—best chance of all—they may pick up a derelict, which, if they can tow her into port, will yield them a small fortune. For instance, on the evening of February 28th, 1838, the inhabitants of St. Ives, Cornwall, sighted a fine brig in the offing. Her eccentric movements suggested that she was out of control, and the pilot boat Dolphin, with a crew of pilots and hoveliers (or “hobbiers,” as they arc called in the West), put out in search, but, taking a wrong direction, failed to find the brig, which had again shifted her course. Meanwhile, the boat Casar, the only boat in the pier having ballast on board, was manned, and eventually found the brig and brought her safely into port. She turned out to be the General Foix, of Havre, bound from Guadaloupe to Havre with a cargo of sugar, coffee, rum, etc. It appeared that she had been abandoned, and her cabin ransacked by her crew before they left. There were seven feet of water in the hold. The log-book stated that she had shipped a heavy sea, which washed four men overboard and broke the legs of two others; the rest of the crew must have abandoned the vessel in the boat The maintopmast and head of the mainmast were carried away, and all sails, except a few old sails below. She was the most valuable prize ever brought into the port of St. Ives, no less than a thousand guineas being paid to the hoveliers for their services.
Again, in the year 1885, a Folkestone boat went out one morning and happened upon a handsome barque, timber-laden, water-logged, and abandoned. Why her crew abandoned her must remain a mystery, for, being timber-laden, she could not possibly sink. However, there she was, and a rich haul she proved for the Folkestone men after they had towed her safely into Dover.
As a set-off against these cases, we must take such instances of ill-fortune
Digitized by Goode
TALES OF HOVELLING.
615
as that of the Caledonia — a crew which took charge of the derelict brig Emily, worked her for ten days in violent gales, although she was jury-rigged and half-full of water, and, in the end, had to let her go. An even worse case, reported by Mr. Clark Russell, was the voyage of five men in the derelict barque Thor, of Tredestrand, laden with scrap-iron and oil casks. “They had to rig a jury*-rudder to get her to sail, and for nearly a fortnight struggled with heavy weather and baffling winds, eventually being shipwrecked near Youghal, and narrowly escaping with their lives, only to witness the craft they had desperately laboured to save go to pieces among the rocks,”
It would appear, therefore, that “ hovelling ” is pretty much of a toss-up. A crew may be out all night in the foulest weather, and return home without having earned sixpence. On the other hand, they may—though this is very rare—fall in with a wreck which is worth a hundred pounds in each man’s pocket. But, on the whole, the hovellers’ prospects grow anything but rosy as the years go on. As we said, the anchor and chain business is almost at an end, and, whatever may be said in favour of iron ships, they make very poor derelicts. A wooden hull will beat about the ocean for years,, perhaps; an iron one, should anything go wrong, has a knack of plumping to the bottom in five minutes, like a burst kettle.
Digitized by GOOQle
CHAPTER XXVI.
SMUGGLERS AND SMUGGLING.
Smuggling—The “ Free-Trade ’’ and the “ Scientific ” periods—Extent of the “ Free-Trade ” in the la# Century—A Seizure in Covent Garden and a Rescue in Bunhill Row—" A Proposal for Preventing of Running Goods ”—Tho Parson at a “ Run ”—Smuggling at St. Ives—A Blow from Behind—John Carter, King o’ Prussia, and his Exploits—The Hawkhurst Gang—Their Fight with the Gouldhurtt Militia—The Attack on Poole Custom House—Chater and Galley—Barbarities of the Gang—A Black Story—The End of the Hawkhunt Gang—The Wigtownshire Trade—A Siren’s Arms—Dirk Hatterakk and Yawkins’s Feat—Cornwall the Smugglers’ Paradiso—The Guernsey Trade—Roscoff—Smuggler# at Dunkirk—Fighting Smugglers—The Mar quit of Granby—The William—The Beaver—Hurry Pau let —Johnson the Smuggler—The Grecian and the Pirate—The Story of Tom Potter and of Roger Toms, the Informer.
Fil HE history of smuggling has been divided by its latest exponent, J- Commander the Hon. H. N. Shore, RN., into two distinct periods:—
First; The “ free-trade ” period, dating back to a very remote age, attaining its greatest prosperity about the middle of last century, and coming to a close during the early yean of the present
Second; The “ scientific ” period, dating from the conclusion of the great war, or about 1816, when the Government, being now at liberty to attend to home affairs, struck the first really effective blow at the free - trader by establishing an organised preventive force round the entire coasts of the United Kingdom.
It requires a great deal of education to teach men that cheating the Government is as bad as cheating one’s neighbour; and the evidence is overwhelming that, during the “ free - trade " period, the public conscience judged smuggling very leniently. On the one hand, you had the country squires, clergy, inn-keepers, shop-keepers, all ready to pay the smuggler for his liquor; on the other, a misty abstraction, known as Government, forbidding the traffic. “ Why,” demanded the smuggler, “ should the King tax good liquor ? If they must have taxes, why can't they tax something else ? ”
A few instances will give some notion of the extent of the “ free-trade,” and the boldness with which it was carried on. The Gentleman’s Magazine for 1733 reports that, on May 13th of that year, between two and three in tho morning, the watchmen- of St. Paul's, Covent Garden, and St. Martin’s-in-the-Ficlds seized 1,100 cwt, of uncustomed tea, together with three men and a boy, with the horses they rode. Two of the men were substantial farmers of Rye. There were nine men of the party, but five made their escape with drawn cutlasses in their hands.
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE TWO PERIODS OF SMUGGLING.
617
Four days later, the watch stopped two women in Whitecross Street, with baskets on their heads containing 117 pounds of tea. The tea was taken to the watch-house, and the women promised to show the house where it came from, and where there was more lying. Accordingly, two of the watchmen were told off to accompany them; but, being come into Bunhill Row,
CAUGHT 1
one of the women cried out, " Robbers, robbers' ” upon which the smugglers ran up, and so beat one of the watchmen about the head with their whiphandles that he died in a few hours.
In the same magazine, under date September 3rd, 1735, we find a note that, “ in several parts of Kent the farmers are obliged to raise wages, and yet are distressed for want of hands to get in their harvest, which is attributed to the great numbers who employ themselves in smuggling along the coast”
Next year (1736) a petition was presented to Parliament by the tea-dealers complaining of the losses they sustained by smuggling. They asserted that
Digitized by LnOOQle
618 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
nearly half the tea consumed in England paid no duty. The duty at this time was four shillings per pound on all teas alike. Again, in December, 1743, a pamphlet was published, containing “A Proposal for Preventing of Running Goods.” In this the writer observes, “ Since an excise duty of four shillings per pound was laid on tea, it has brought an average of £130,000 a year into the Exchequer, which is but for 650,000 pounds weight of tea. But that the real consumption is vastly greater, a single fact will prove. Some years ago, the treasurer of our East India Company received a letter from Holland intimating that one person in the province of Zeeland smuggled yearly for England no less than half a million pounds. Though this seemed incredible, the directors, upon inquiry, were convinced of the fact that such a person there was who, some few years before, had been but an English sailor, was now married to a woman that kept a china-shop, and had so well managed affairs that he had four sloops of his own constantly employed in smuggling; that the quantity of tea which he was supposed to export had not at all been magnified, and that he had more guineas and English specie in his house than any banker in England." The author, whose political economy was in a somewhat rudimentary stage, proposed as a remedy a tax of from 5s. to 20s. upon all families that drank tea. The amount of tea consumed in the whole of Great Britain was then reckoned at 1,500,000 pounds, the price of which in bond was from 5s. 9d. to 6s. 10d. per pound.
But, perhaps, the most striking record is found in the will of Philip Hawkins, M.P. for Gram pound, in Cornwall, who died on September 6 th, 1738, and actually bequeathed £600 to the King, to compensate for the amount to which his tenants had defrauded the Customs.
Nor were the parsons behindhand, as a story told by the Rev. R. S. Hawker, Vicar of Morwenstowc, goes to prove. “It was full six in the evening •of an autumn day,” writes Mr. Hawker, “ when a traveller arrived where the road ran along by a sandy beach just above high-water mark. The stranger, who was a native of some inland town and utterly unacquainted with Cornwall and its ways, had reached the brink of the tide just as a 'landing’ was coming off. It was a scene not only to instruct a townsman, but to dazzle and surprise. At sea, just beyond the billows, lay the vessel, well moored with anchors at stem and stern. Between the ship and the shore boats, laden to the gunwale, passed to and fro. Crowds assembled on the beach to help the cargo ashore. On the one hand, a boisterous group surrounded a keg with the head knocked in, for simplicity of access to the good cognac, into which they dipped whatsoever vessel came first to hand; one man had filled his shoe. On the other side, they fought and wrestled, cursed and swore. Horrified at what he saw, the stranger lost all self-command, and, oblivious of personal danger, he began to shout, ' What a horrible sight! Have you no shame ? Is there no magistrate at hand ? Cannot any Justice of the Peace be found in this fearful country ? ’
Digitized byVrOOQlC
THE EARLY “FREE-TRADERS."
619
“ * No; thanks be to God,’ answered a hoarse, gruff voice. ‘ None within eight miles.’
“ ‘ Well, then,’ screamed the stranger, ' is there no clergyman hereabout 1 Does no minister of the parish live among you, on this coast?’
'"Aye! to be sure; there is,' said the same deep voice.
•“‘Well, how far off does he live? Where is he?’
“1 That’s he, sir, yonder, with the lanthorn.'
“ And, sure enough, there he stood on a rock, and poured, with pastoral diligence, the ' light of other days ’ on a busy congregation.”
An old man at Lelant, in Cornwall, informed the present vicar that early in this century he had seen Lelant Church full of kegs of French brandy stored there by smugglers, who considered the church a very safe hiding place, because no one would ever dream of resorting there on a week day.
But the boldness of the smugglers was not less extraordinary than the extent of their operations. Going back to Elizabethan times, we may begin with a document preserved at the Record Office—a bundle of parchment rolls containing the depositions of witnesses examined before a Commission appointed in the year 1598 to inquire into a smuggling affair at St. Ives. It appears that one Captain Charles Cock, master of a French barque named the Pearl, of Rochelle, brought a cargo of salt and other goods into Mount’s Bay, in the autumn of 1597. The salt was transported to St Ives, where Mr. Lawrence Bird, tho “ deputy Customer,” forbade its landing until he could satisfy himself that the duty had been paid. Upon this one Peter Newman, a merchant, • contemptuously used ” Mr. Bird and struck him a blow, “ whereuppon evill wordes increased betweene them.” Peter Newman, being examined, confessed “that he called tho said deputy Customer Jack and Knave, and afterwards did strike him”; but pleaded that Mr. Bird had threatened to strike back.
Besides his salt, Captain Cock carried a romantic cargo. It included “ twelve Buttes of Candy Wyne, called Muskadell,” also “ vj Barbary ffowyl ”— these were hawks of a very valuable breed. “The said Charles Cock had also gold in Brasslets about one of his armes, and another in his hand; . . . . also this Dcpont saw the said Cock have in a redd purse barbaric gould wch by the bignes of the purse remayninge in this Depont's custody, esteemed to be an Cth pounds at tho least” In spite of Mr. Bird, these butts of wine were landed, and rolled along tho streets into the cellars of the principal inhabitants. But even his ineffective protest was taken in very ill part, for we hear, on the evidence of one William Mabbe, that a Captain Morgan, on the following month, “sent in to Mount’s-bayc two Barques by wayo of reprizall, with jmrtingallc salt and earthem potts .... and this Deponent hath heard some should save that if the deputie customer should demand custome of the said Captainc Morgan, he the said Captain Morgan did not care to eutt off the earcs of the deputie customer.”
In the end, we read that William Mabbe and Peter Newman were
Digitized byVrOOQlC
620
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
“publicklie punisshed in the counteye for their misdemeanours," which seems to mean that they were put into the stocks—no very severe infliction.
A certain free and sportive handling of their Customs officers seems to have
remained a tradition with the inhabitants of St. Ives. One day during the last century, a strange vessel ran on the rocks in the bay, and the crew went ashore up into the country, and were never more heard of. Next day, a number of people boarded the ship, and found it full of china-ware and other smuggled goods. The ship’s papers were removed by some person unknown, and it was supposed that they were burnt as implicating sundry of the local gentry. The Customs officer, Roger Woarne, went on board and stuffed his clothes full of china He had several pieces of beautiful china-ware in the seat of his breeches, and, as he was getting down the ship’s side, somebody took a stick and gave him a sound blow behind, smashing the china to atoms’
In the latter half of the List century, there lived a man by Perth Leah, in JI on nt’s Bay, who was called John Carter, but who was more usually known as the “ King of Prussia” From him Porth Leah took the name of Prussia Cove, which it bears to this day. He cut harbours there and a road, turned the caves into smuggling cellars, and even rigged up a small batter}’, with which he boldly opened tire on a Revenue cutter. On one occasion, while he was away from home, the Excise officers from Penzance came around in their
Digitized by LnOOQle
JOHN CARTER, KING O’ PRUSSIA.
6’1
boats, and found a cargo which had lately arrived from France. This they seized and carried oft' to Penzance, where they secured it in the Custom House store. In due course. John Carter returned to the cove and heard the news. What was he to do ? As he explained to his comrades, he had agreed to deliver that cargo to his customers by a certain day, and his reputation as an honest man was at stake. He must keep his word. That night, a number of armed men broke into the stores at Penzance, and the “King of Prussia” took his own again and marched back to the cove. Next morning, the officers found that the place had been broken open. They examined the stores, and, having found what particular things were missing, they said to one another that John
Carter had been there, and they knew it, because he was an honest man, who would not take anything that did not belong to him. And John Carter kept his word to his customers.
Digitized by GOOQle
622
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
A more famous, and a much more disgraceful, exploit than this was the
attack on the Poole Custom House by the Hawkhurst gang of smugglers, in
the year 1747. A certain amount of good humour, and even of chivalry, went with the Scotch and Cornish smuggling. The smugglers of Kent and Sussex, on the other hand, were unredeemed brutes, as our story will show.
As early apprehension
as of
PIKE-HEAD, TAKEN FROM A SMUGGLER in 1838.
GVow hi. the Dorset Cnuntif Miucnni, Dorchefter.)
December, 1744, a reward of £50 had been offered for the the persons concerned in assaulting and wounding an officer of the Customs at Shoreham, in Kent, with his three assistants, and currying them off by force to Hawkhurst, in Kent There the smugglers dragged two of these four, who had been formerly of their gang, to a wood, tied them to trees, whipped them almost to death, and then clapped them on board a vessel and sent them to France. The gang really terrorised the whole country-side, and at last their robberies and insolence became so intolerable that the inhabitants of the neighbouring village of Gouldhurst formed themselves into a body, under the title of the “Gouldhurst Militia,” to resist them. The gang, who had captured a member of the Militia and tortured him into a full confession of these proceedings, sent him back to Gouldhurst with a message that, on a certain day, they intended to attack the village, murder all the inhabitants, and burn it to the ground. On hearing this, the Gouldhurst men scoured the country for firearms, melted down all the available lead into bullets, and prepared for a stout fight True to their word, at the hour appointed the smugglers, led by a determined ruffian, named Thomas Kingsmill, made their appearance, and, after threatening for a bit, opened fire in earnest. The Militia promptly returned it., killing one of the gang, and after the loss of two more, besides several disabled, the smugglers made off, pursued by the Gouldhurst lads, who succeeded in making several prisoners.
We now come to the affair of the Poole Custom House, and the rescue,
by Kingsmill and his merry men, of thirty-seven hundredweight of tea, valued at over £500. This tea was to have been run on tho coast of Sussex, but the commander of the Revenue cutter at Poole, having got wind of the design, intercepted the smuggling vessel, captured her after a long chase, took her into Poole, and handed her cargo over to the Collector of Customs. The tea and other goods were then stored for safety- in the Custom House.
The smugglers, to whom the cargo belonged, swore revenge. After some consultation, sixty of them, well armed, assembled in Charlton Forest, belonging to the Duke of Richmond, and set their hands to a piece of paper to go and break open Poole Custom House. It was agreed that thirty of them
Digitized by
Google
THE ATTACK ON POOLE CUSTOM HOUSE.
623
should make the attack, and the remaining thirty act as scouts along the different roads. Accordingly, on Tuesday, October 6th, in the glimpse of tho evening, they set out for Poole at about 11 at night.
Arriving at Poole, they sent two men down into the town to see if the coast was clear. One of them came back and reported that there was a large sloop lying up against the quay ; she might train her guns on the Custom House door and tear them in pieces if they made the attempt. Hearing this, the Sussex men were turning their horses to go back, when Kingsmill and the Hawk hurst men swore, "If you won’t do it, we’ll go and do it ourselves.” While they were still consulting, the second man arrived with the news that the tide was low, and that the vessel lay so that she could not bring her guns to bear on the Custom House. Thereupon the smugglers rode down a back lane on the left side of the town and came to the seaside. Here they left their horses, and, marching up to the Custom House, broke open the door, secured their tea, packed it on their horses, and rode off in triumph. Early in the morning they reached Fordingbridge (where a throng of spectators witnessed their entry), breakfasted and fed their horses, and then turned towards the coast. On their way, they borrowed a pair of steelyards and weighed the tea, and equally divided to each man his share. It made five bags a man, about twenty-seven pounds in a bag.
A large reward was offered, but some months passed away before the slightest clue could be found. Hero were thirty armed men riding into a seaport town, storming the King's warehouse, passing openly next morning through a populated country, drawing crowds out to look at them; and yet, in ail those crowds, not a man dared to come forward and help in bringing them to justice. This gives some idea of the terror which these smugglers inspired. Further proof, if proof be wanted, will be found in the story that follows.
One Sunday morning, in the February following the attack on the Poole Custom House, an aged tide-waiter in the service of the Customs at Southampton and a man named Chater, a shoe-maker of Fordingbridge, arrived at the little village of Rowlands Castle, on the border between Hampshire and Sussex, and, after inquiring the way to Stanstead, drew up their horses at the “ White Hart" Inn. The widow Payne, who kept the inn, managed to elicit from them, while serving them with refreshments, that they were travelling with a letter for Major Batten, a Justice of the Peace for the county of Sussex. Like many another licensed victualler, she had dealings with the smugglers; her own two sons, indeed, were engaged in the “ trade.” Filled with suspicion, she sent a hasty word to them that, in her belief, the strangers knew something about the Poole business.
The news quickly spread. Soon quite a number of smugglers lounged into the inn and ordered drinks. After chatting with the strangers for some time in a friendly way, one of the men induced Chater to step outside, and
Digitized by LnOOQle
624
THE STORY OF THE SEA. ‘
elicited from him that he was on his way to swear information against a man concerned in the Poole business. Galley, the tide-waiter, fearing that his witness was being tampered with, came out to bring him back, but was promptly knocked down by one of the smugglers. " You had better take care,” said Galley; “ I am a King’s officer.” “ You a King’s officer; ” said the fellow, with an oath. “ I’ll make a King’s officer of you, and for a quartern of gin I’ll serve you so again.” At this point some of the smugglers interposed and put an end to the squabble, and they all turned
THB OLD “ MD LION ’’ INN, AT KAKE.
in again to drink.
In a short while, Galley and Chater were insensible through drink— whether drugged or not is not known. They were put to bed and kept there until darkness set in, then taken out and tied on to one horse, with their logs strapped together under the belly. A party of smugglers was waiting on horseback to escort them.
It appeared afterwards that the smugglers at first intended to keep the two men hidden for a
while, and then pack them across to France.
But this treatment was far
too mild to suit the wives of the
smugglers, who had come out to see the
fun, and now cried out, “ Hang the dogs! They came here to hang us! ” So it was decided to carry the men off, and keep them hidden until it was known what fate would befall one of their own number who had been
arrested on suspicion, and against whom Chater was going to give evidence. But the cavalcade had no sooner started than a smuggler called Jackson, their leader, began to lay on to the two men with a heavy whip, calling to his comrades to do the same. Instantly the whole body of smugglers began to cut and slash, until, in their agony, Galley and Chater rolled over with their heads under the horse’s belly, in which posture they were driven some distance, the horse’s hoofs striking their heads at every step. They
Digitized by LnOOQle
BARBARITY OF THE HAWKHURST GANG.
625
■were then set upright again, and again the smugglers laid on their long whips over head, face, and shoulders, until once more the poor creatures rolled over with their heads downwards. Finding them too weak to keep upright.
Smugglers’ Receipt®, dated 1776, for Spirits and Tea supplied by Peter Le Coeq to Mathew Vom, probably Landlord of the “George1* Inu, Weymouth, in a crevice of the walls of which building they were found when it was demolished in 1885. By permiMiou of the Curator Of the Dorset County Museum, Dorchester.
the smugglers now unbound them, and laid them separately across the horses behind two of the party. Thus they rode through the dark night along the Sussex border for ten terrible miles, Galley suffering tortures all the way, and just able to murmur, “Barbarous usage, barbarous usage—for God's sake, shoot me through the head I ”
40
Digitized by
Google
62(1
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
At last, the two men became unconscious, and in this condition were brought, in the early morning, to the “ Red Lion" Inn, at Rake, near Liss. Here they entered and spent some time drinking, and then took Galley’s body out to the wood near by and buried it in a sand-pit, though there is some doubt whether the breath was actually out of his body, for when the corpse was dug up again some months later, tho hands were found held over the face as if to protect it. The particular spot in the lovely valley of Hartingcombe is still pointed out as “ Galley's grave,” and the cottage at Rake that was once the old “ Red Lion ” Inn is still standing.
Meanwhile, the unhappy Chater, with the blood pouring down him, was taken off to the village of Tros ton, four miles away, to the house of a well-known smuggler, and there chained by the leg ton post in a “ turf-house,” and kept for two days and nights, with a couple of smugglers mounting guard over him.
The rest of the smugglers, having buried Galley, were now back at the “ Red Lion,” drinking and discussing how to get rid of Chater. First, it was proposed to shoot him by tying a string to the trigger of a gun, and then by all taking hold of it and pulling, so as to equalise their share in the guilt of the murder. But afterwards they decided on carrying him to Lady Holt Park, and throwing him into a well, called “ Harris’s Well.” But even this. was not enough for them, for, while attempting to say the Lord’s Prayer before starting, he was horribly knifed across the face by a loathsome scoundrel named Tapner. They then hoisted him on Tapner's horse and carried him to the well, where, after fresh tortures, he was pitched in head first, and large stones were thrown down upon him. When every sign of life had gone, the smugglers mounted their horses and dispersed to their homes before daybreak.
They now imagined that they had got rid of all the evidence the authorities had been able to secure about the Poole affair, and that their manner of doing so would effectually. deter any other would-be informer. For a time this belief seemed justified. The disappearance of Galley and Chater soon, of course, led the authorities to suspect that some misfortune had befallen them ; and when it was reported that Galley’s great-coat had been picked up on the road near Rowlands Castle, in a bloody condition, there remained no room for doubt that they had fallen into the hands of the smugglers, and had been either murdered or shipped across to France. A reward and a free pardon were accordingly proclaimed for anyone who should discover what had become of the men.
Six or seven months passed, and nothing was discovered. Then there reached the authorities an anonymous letter, in which a hint was dropped as to the resting-place of poor Galley. The hint was acted on, and the body found. Then came another letter from the same source, giving the name of a man who was concerned in the affair. The accused was arrested, and immediately offered himself King’s evidence, and made a full discovery and disclosure of the whole transaction, as well as of the persons concerned. Lists
Digitized by ^OOQlC
A BLACK TRAGEDY, AND RETRIBUTION,
627
of these names were at once posted, with a declaration that, unless the men surrendered to justice at a day appointed, they would be outlawed, anti a promise of £500 reward for the apprehension of every one who should be afterwards convicted. The result was that, within a short time, seven of tho murderers were lodged in gaol, and tried at Chichester, at a special assize, on •January 16th, 1749. The whole were found guilty and sentenced to execution; but one of them (Jackson, the man who had begun by laying his whip on Galley and Chater) was seized with such horror at the sentence that he died in two hours. He was a Roman Catholic and a superstitious man, and inside his waistcoat pocket was found a linen purse with the following paper carefully sewn on it:—
“ Ye three Holy Kings, Gaspar, Melchior, Balthasar, Pray for us now, and in the hour of death."
“The papers have touched the three heads of the Holy Kings at Cologne. They are to preserve travellers from accidents on the roads, headaches, falling sickness, fever, witchcraft, all kinds of mischief, and sudden death.”
Two more of the men implicated in the murders, and two others of the Hawkhurst gang, were soon after sentenced at East Grinstead. And on April 14th, five men, including Thomas Kingsmill, were convicted at the Old Bailey, and executed at Tyburn. “And thus,” says Commander Shore, “one of the most notorious bands of criminals that ever figured in the annals of crime was ' smashed up ’ and effectually put an end to, to the relief of all peaceful and law-abiding citizens."
The reader has had, by this time, quite enough of the Kent and Sussex smugglers, of whose brutality the foregoing is but one example out of many. Let us turn then to Scotland, where the “ trade,” although less prosperous by reason of the comparative sparseness of the population, was, nevertheless, carried on pretty briskly, especially along the shores of the Solway Firth and the neighbouring counties. Commander Shore’s book contains the following quotation on the Wigtownshire trade:—
“ My friend, Mr. James McWilliam, formerly officer of Excise at Wigtown, in a letter which I received, dated Wigtown, September 28th, 1840, says, in answer to some queries which I had put to him on the subject of smuggling: • I remember, in the year 1777, being then a boy of about twelve years of age, counting two hundred and ten horses, laden with tea, spirits, and tobacco, accompanied by about half that number of " Lingtowmen,” passing within a milo of the town of Wigtown, in open defiance of the supervisor, two Excise officers, and about thirty soldiers, stationed at Wigtown to assist the Revenue officers in the suppression of smuggling. I recollect this circumstance particularly from four of the smugglers' horses falling down dead in the road, as was supposed, from the heat of the day and the strong smell of the tobacco.
Digitized byVrOOQlC
628
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
" ‘ I recollect that about the same time I accompanied my father, who was then Excise officer in Wigtown, and the supervisor, with about twenty-five soldiers, to Port William, where two luggers were lying ready to discharge their cargoes of contraband goods. One of these luggers mounted twenty-two guns, the other fourteen, and each had a crew of about fifty men. Upon our arrival at the beach, the commander of one of these vessels came on shore, and said if the party did not instantly retire he would cause a broadside to be discharged from the ships, and would land a hundred armed men to clear the beach of us; but, if the party would retire quietly to a distance of three or four miles, so as not to disturb the landing of their goods, he
SKETCH MAP SHOWING TUB CHIEF SMUGGLING ENTREPOTS ON THE CONTINENT, ALSO THE PRINCIPAL SMUGGLING PORTS ON THE SOUTH COAST.
would leave thirty or forty ankers of spirits for us on the beach. Our party retired, and the captain of the lugger fulfilled his promise by leaving thirty-six casks of spirits for us at the place appointed.’”
And again:—“ A few miles from Lochnaw is the little harbour of Dailybay. Here, one day in the last century, some smugglers had landed a cargo of their usual wares, such as brandy, wines, and tobacco, and these were carried up the hill of South Cairn, waiting till a band of volunteers arrived with a string of pack-horses to transport them inwards for distribution. The Custom House officer in charge of the district received information of their doings, and hurrying to the spot with the only coastguardsman* disengaged, he promptly effected a seizure of the whole of the goods. The smugglers skulked off, and the one coastguardsman was sent back to press men and horses, in the
* Thu is a common mistake. There was no such service as the coastguard till after the peace in the early part of this century.
Digitized by^OOQlC
TALES OF THE SCOTS SMUGGLERS
629
King’s name, to convey the precious treasure to Stranraer. The officer, pluming himself not a little on his alacrity, sauntered sentry-fashion round and round his prize, which lay heaped before him in rich profusion, his sword and a brace of formidable pistols by his side. Presently Maggie McConnell approached the great man, wishing him a good-morning, to which he affably
11 IN CIRCLED BY TRI hirer's AUXS ” (p. 629).
replied, and accepted Maggie's proffered hand. He had unwittingly sealed his own fate. His arm was thrust upwards, and at the same instant he was encircled by the siren's arms, and with a heavy fall was thrown helplessly upon his back Maggie then sat coolly down upon her victim, and, having placed her apron over his eyes, she held him firmly down as if bound in a vice. In vain he struggled; he coaxed and threatened her by
Digitized by
Google
630
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
turns; he shouted for help in the King's name, and for a moment his hopes ran high; footsteps approached; he roared louder and louder, but no friendly voice replied. At last, but only when it suited her pleasure, Maggie released him from her grasp. But, oh, the vanity of human hopes ■ When he looked up, not one of the articles lay in its old place, as he had himself seen them just before upon the ground. By-and-hy, his companion reappeared, but only to find the head officer tete-ii-tete with this Galloway matron, who, bidding them adieu, disappeared without further loss of time, wishing them both a pleasant ride into Stranraer.” *
Sir Walter Scott tells us that, in writing his novel, “ Guy Mannering,” he based his character of Dirk Hatteraick on “ a Dutch skipper called Yawkins, well known on the coast of Galloway and Dumfriesshire as sole proprietor and master of a buckkar, or smuggling lugger, called the Black Prince, often employed by French, Dutch, Manx, and Scottish smuggling companies.” A story follows, that on one occasion he was landing his cargo at the Manxman’s Lake, near Kirkcudbright, when two Revenue cruisers, the Pigmy and the Dwarf, hove in sight at once, on different tacks, the one coming round by the Isles of Fleet, the other between the Point of Rueberry and the Muckle Ron. Yawkins promptly weighed anchor, and bore down right between the luggers, so that he tossed his hat on the deck of the one and his wig on the deck of the other, hoisted a cask to his maintop to show his occupation, and bore away under an extraordinary pressure of canvas without receiving injury.
But the smuggler’s paradise was, undoubtedly, Cornwall Its comparative isolation (which lasted to the middle of this century), the nature of its coast, with its fine natural harbours and ramifying creeks, the seagoing qualities of its inhabitants, its nearness to those most convenient entrepots, the Channel Islands—all these marked it out for the head-quarters of the " trade.” The Cornishmen took to it as inland villagers take to poaching. The smith left his forge, and the husbandman his plough; even women and children turned out to assist, and received their share of the profit. That it was in any degree a dishonest pursuit, perhaps never entered their minds: and if it did, they saw enough in the conduct of those above them to satisfy them that theirs was a venial offence. The gentry of the neighbourhood bought their brandy and lace; the Excise and Custom House officers, and even the captains of Revenue cruisers, connived at the game. There is a story of four Mount’s Bay men, who were caught by a captain of a Revenue cutter with their boat full of tubs of contraband spirit. One of the men cried so bitterly, imploring the captain not to rob him of what ho had paid for, and begging that some of it might be restored for the
• “ History of Wigtownshire.”
Digitized byVrOOQlC
THE GUERNSEY TRADE.
631
sake of his wife and children, that the captain took pity on him, and allowed him to carry off three of the kegs. When they reached the shore, the others began to consult how they might best divide the three tubs between four men. “ Stop a bit," said Joe. “ 'Tis none of yours, n>y dears; 'tis all mine. You didn’t cry none, any of ’ce. The captain gave it to me for crying.’’
On another occasion, a boat’s crew of four being caught by the cutter in the act of smuggling, the captain said to the youngest, “ You, my young fellow, will do for a man-of-war, and you three,” addressing the others, “ will go to prison.” “All right, sir,” replied one; “I’ve been in more French prisons than you’ve been in parish churches, I’ll wage."
"We have mentioned the Channel Islands as the great entrepot of the smuggling trade. These islands, "by reason of certain ancient charters, enjoyed certain peculiar privileges; among them, exemption from the Excise laws and Customs regulations of Great Britain. Until the law was altered, therefore, the English smugglers could lie there and load, secure from interference on the part of British cruisers. The inhabitants of the islands were not slow to use their advantages; and up to 1775 —the period of the first American wrar —the trade of Guernsey in particular was chiefly confined to the importation of spirits and tobacco to supply the wants of the English smugglers. Several attempts were made by tho British Government to suppress this injurious trade; and, in 1767, a Custom House was actually established in Guernsey. Hardly was this done, when the French Government (who had excellent reasons for looking favourably on the damage done by smuggling to the British revenue) determined to open a free port, or jwrt d'entrep6t, on their own coast The place chosen was Rosco ft’, a little-known port on the Breton coast. The effect of this was felt immediately. Roscoff suddenly grew into importance, and became a household word among our West countrymen.
Napoleon did his best to encourage the traffic. Speaking afterwards of the English smugglers—but particularly of those of Kent and Sussex—he said: " They- did great mischief to your Government; they took from France annually forty or fifty millions of silks and brandy.” He even allotted a part of Dunkirk to them, to which they were restricted: " but, as they latterly' went out of their limits, committed riots, and insulted everybody, I ordered Gravelines to be prepared for their reception, where they had a little camp for their accommodation. At one. time there were upwards of five hundred of them in Dunkirk. I had every information I wanted through them. They brought over newspapers and dispatches from the spies that we had in London. They took over spies from France, landed and kept them in their houses for some days, then dispersed them over the country, and brought them back when wanted. They came over in boats not broader than this bath. It was really astonishing to see them passing your 74-gun ships
Digitized by
Google
632
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
in defiance.1' * It was even said that the money for Napoleon’s last campaign —the campaign that ended in Waterloo—was taken over to him from London by the smugglers. In plain English, a great number of these fellows were ready to turn their hands to any dirty job that promised money.
But let us look at the other side of the picture. Whatever the faults of the “ trade,” it certainly turned out splendid seamen.
Take, for instance, the case of the Marquis of Granby. She was captured off the Goodwins by a French lugger. The captain and two men were put
BI. HELENA.
into the Frenchman’s boat to be taken on board the privateer. But the privateer had her eye on another vessel, and, giving chase, had soon left the boat nearly five miles astern. The smuggling skipper saw his opportunity. With a sudden clutch he caught the sword out of the hands of the officer of the boat, and, holding it at his breast, said to the French rowers, " Now, Johnnies, you will please to row me back to my own ship.” They had to obey. As they brought the boat alongside, he and his two men gallantly boarded his vessel and cleared the deck of the Frenchmen left in charge, who jumped overboard to save their lives, and were picked up by their own boat. In this plight the smuggler left them, and proceeded gaily on his voyage.
A case almost more amusing is that of the William. She was captured
* Barry O’Meara's “ Napoleon at St. Helena."
Digitized by LnOOQle
"A HAND-TO-HAND FIGHT” (p J»I
Digitized by LnOOQle
634
THE STOHY OF THE SEA.
by a privateer off Bridlington. All her crew but three were taken off and five Frenchmen put on board. As soon as the privateer was out of sight, the three Englishmen managed to choke the pumps with cinders, and then called out to the Frenchmen that the vessel was sinking. “ What shall we do ? ” cried the Frenchmen. “ Well, unless you want to go to the bottom, you had better steer her for the nearest English port.” This the Frenchmen did, and managed to work the ’William into Sunderland, where they were promptly taken prisoners and marched off to Durham Gaol.
Take next the case of the Beaver smuggler. She, too, was taken by a French privateer, La Brave, of eighteen guns and seventy men. The Frenchmen put a prize-master and four seamen in the prize, leaving only the skipper and a boy on board. The skipper managed to catch the prize - master unawares in the cabin, knocked him down, and fastened his hands behind him. He then ran on deck with a crowbar and a pistol. The French steersman, seeing him advancing, tried to dodge, slipped his foot, fell overboard, and was drowned. The other three Frenchmen were aloft. The English skipper, taking the helm, called out to them to remain aloft or he would shoot them. In this manner, handling the helm with one hand, and with the other covering the frightened Frenchmen, he steered his vessel all night Next morning he sighted an English frigate, signalled her, handed over his prisoners, and was conveyed by her safely into port.
An old volume of the Annual Beijister tells the story of Harry Paulet, a famous Hampshire smuggler, who once made his escape from a French vessel, taking with him a bag of dispatches he saw hanging up in the cabin. On another occasion Paulet happened to be sneaking across with a cargo of brandy when he sighted the French fleet, which, under Conflans, had stolen out of Brest. This was on the 14th of November, 1759. There had been a good deal of rough weather previously, and Conflans thought that Hawke, who was watching him with the British fleet, was still sheltering at Torbay. As it happened, Hawke had left Torbay, and reached his station just as Paulet, who loved his country better than his cargo, sailed into sight, steered boldly for the Admiral’s ship, and reported that the French had slipped out to the southward, and were steering east. “ If you are telling me the truth,” said Hawke, “ I will make your fortune; if you have lied to me, I will hang you at the yard-ann.” The fleet weighed instantly, soon sighted the French, and overtook them in Quibcr n Bay. The Admiral now ordered Paulet back into his little vessel; but the smuggler begged leave to remain and have a share in the fight. This was granted, and Paulet fought like a Briton; and when the fight was over and the great victory won, Hawke sent him home with letters of commendation in his pocket and money in his purse that enabled him to buy a public-house in London and spend the rest of his days in case.
Johnson, another famous Hampshire smuggler at the beginning of this
Digitized by LnOOQle
FIGHTING SMUGGLERS.
635
century, was a still more famous character. On one occasion Napoleon offered him a sum equal to £600 a year if he would pilot a French fleet to the English coast. He replied, “ I am a smuggler, but a true lover of my country, and no traitor.” Ho was thrown into prison; but, having on at least two occasions broken out of English gaols, he lost little time in making his escape from a French one, offered his services to the English Government, was appointed to the Fox Revenue cutter, and served so well in suppressing his old trade that when at Plymouth he hardly dared venture to set foot on shore. He took part in several actions with the French privateers, and during the Walcheren expedition performed a brilliant feat, swimming with a rope to the ramparts of a fort and exploding an infernal machine with terrible effect. He was also the inventor of something like an early submarine boat. Oddly enough, he seems to have preserved some affection for Napoleon, for it was to carry off the exile of St Helena to the United States that this boat was designed. The boat was 100 feet long, with masts and sails that could be doused and stowed away handily when diving became necessary. Johnson was to have been rewarded munificently after the exile’s escape, besides receiving £40,000 on the day when his boat was ready for sea. The death of Napoleon, however, put an end to the scheme.
Yet another story of gallant smugglers comes from Cornwall. About the beginning of the century, the Revenue cutter Providence, chiefly manned by Polperro men, was caught by another Revenue cutter in the very act of smuggling. The Providence was tried, and condemned by the courts as & smuggler. Having gone through the process of being sold by auction from the Revenue service to the Admiralty, her name was changed to the Grecian, and all her crew were sent, as a punishment, aboard her to the West Indies. Here they shortly fell in with a pirate. The breeze being dull at the time, they lowered their boat to attack her, upon which the pirate was run aground a considerable distance off shore, and her crew tried to escape in the boats. They were overtaken just before landing, and a hand-to-hand fight took place in the surf, the combatants being up to their knees in water. Many of the pirates were killed, and the remainder were all taken prisoners and conveyed to Jamaica. For this gallant conduct the crew of the Grecian were all given their freedom and allowed to return home to their families.
A less cheerful story of West Country smuggling may conclude this chapter.* One morning the crew of a Revenue boat descried a lugger lying quietly becalmed in Whitsand Bay, between Plymouth and Looe. The glass informed them that it was the Lottery, of Polperro, well known for her fust-sailing qualities, as well as for the hardihood of her crew. There was little doubt that with the springing up of the breeze she would put to sea, and thero would be another opportunity of taunt and sneer at the supineness of th&
* “ The History of Polperro,” by the late Dr. Jonathan Couch.
Digitized by LnOOQle
636
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
volpebbu.	off, making sure of a rare capture,
for there seemed little chance of an
escape. Tlieir movements were, however, observed by the smugglers, who made preparation for resistance. The boats, on seeing their intentions, commenced firing when at a considerable distance; but it was not until they had approached her pretty near that the shots were returned from the lugger, which now assumed an unmistakable attitude of defiance. When within a few yards of the expected prize, Ambrose Bowden, who pulled the bow-oar of one* of the attacking boats, fell mortally wounded. It was plain that the Polperro men had come to a determination not to give up their fine craft and valuable cargo without a struggle, so the boats deemed it their wisest course to withdraw and allow the Lottery to proceed to sea This affray was, of course, reported to the authorities, and it was determined to mark this daring act of resistance to the law, aggravated by manslaughter, with their highest displeasure. Orders were issued to arrest the vessel, and all or part of her crew, wherever they might be found. The smugglers were alarmed at their act, and, from the dogged manner in which the officers of justice pursued them, they saw but little chance of escape. They were kept continually in terror, and were afraid to sleep in their own houses without a watch, or to visit their families except with the utmost secrecy of movement. At the dead of night, or at mid-day, they were liable to have their houses surrounded by a troop of dragoons, who made stealthy descents upon the town. They were hidden for days in
Digitized by^OOQlC
STOEY OF TOM POTTEB.
637
secret closets (of which each house had one or more), or wandered the country by night and lay concealed during the day in the farmers* strawhouses, where often the tramp of their pursuers was heard as they passed near their place of concealment.
At length one of the crew of the Lottery, tired of this hide - and - seek life, and even, perhaps, thinking that his services in so important a matter would be highly rewarded, gave himself up as evidence, and pointed out Tom Potter, -one of his comrades, as the man who had fired the shot
The Polperro people made common cause of it, and their thoughts were divided between a care to preserve Potter from the law and a feeling of utter detestation of the conduct of Toms, the informer. Their wits were, therefore, set to work to accomplish the concealment and ultimate escape of the former, and to remove the latter, and with him the only decisive evidence in the case. The Revenue men well knew the danger in which Toms stood, and took him into the crew of a cutter which cruised on the coast. On a certain occasion this cutter was at Polruan, five or six miles
POLPERRO HAHUOVB,
westward from Polperro. By the aid of alternate entreaty and threat, and with a solemn promise that no bodily harm should be done to her husband, Toms’ wife was persuaded to go to Polruan (pretending that the visit was a clandestine one), and if, as it was expected would happen, he offered to
Digitized by
Google
638
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
see her a mile out of town, to accept of his companionship. The event answered the hopes entertained. In the dusk of the evening he was seen leading his wife across the Lan tick Downs, when three or four men sprung from behind a hedge, secured him, and carried him off to some place of concealment. So carefully was this managed, that, notwithstanding the most diligent search, ho was not to be traced. The smugglers removed him from place to place of concealment as circumstances rendered it necessary, without malice or cruelty, and on the first opportunity took him to Guernsey, preparatory to shipping him for America. At Guernsey he was traced, and when in the hold of an out war'd - bound vessel he was pounced on by the Government officer's, to whom, it is believed, he had managed to discover himself.
Meanwhile, the dragoons, who had been engaged in the search at home, discovered that, notwithstanding all their caution, their movements were watched, and that intelligence of their approach from Plymouth was sure to precede them to Polperro. A detachment was, therefore, sent to Truro, with orders to march from the west, in which way they were enabled to come to Polperro unobserved. On one of these visits poor Potter was surprised in his own house, which, unlike most other houses in the place, had no back door leading to the hills, or he might, even then, have escaped. He was taken to London, tried at the Old Bailey, and convicted on the evidence of Roger Toms, which was to the effect that while he (Toms) was in the cabin, and not actually engaged in the fray, Potter came down, and said, with an oath, that “he had done for one of them.” This was enough, as no question could be made of the unlawful resistance, or of the loss of life. Yet this evidence was believed by many to be false, and even impossible. An old coastguardsman, who was engaged in the attack on the lugger, averred that the unfortunate man Bowden was accidentally shot by one of their own crew, and it was admitted to be a strange circumstance that the shot had entered the man’s breast in a direction opposite to the fire of the smugglers.
After Potter’s execution, great as was the pity for him, the desire of revenge was even stronger. Roger Toms was execrated in his native place; even his children learned to detest him, and to this day his name is a term of reproach. His evidence was deemed necessary to convict the other offenders when captured, and he was kept at Newgate in some menial employment until his death. This is all the Polperro people know, or wish to know, about him.
Potter’s comrades were perseveringly hunted for a long time, and many stirring tales are told of their escape ; but, while a few were punished, the rest contrived to keep out of reach until after the establishment of the coastguard, when a general amnesty appears to have been extended to tho offenders.
Digitized by GOOQle
CHAPTER XXVII.
SMUGGLERS V. COASTGUARD.
Tho Government Wakes Up, and the “Scientific Period” Bogina—The Excisemen—The Coast Blockade and the Preventive Water Guard—The Riding Officers; Who They Were and How They Worked —The “Nethcr-Mynton” Raid—A Tell-tale Keg and a Protracted Hunt—The Villagers on the Church-tower—The Cacht in the Orchard—Origin of tho Coastguard—Routine of a Coastguard Station—A Preventive Force and a Reserve for the Navy—Analysis of a Smuggling Operation— Tho Freighter, the Boatmen and the Tub carriers—Their Duties and their Dangers—Sinking a “Crop”—"Stinkibus”—A Direct Run—Working tho Tubs Inland—Queer Hiding-places—Penalties for Assisting—The Mullyon " Spotsman ”—“ Fish very Slight this Morning ”—What Goods were Prohibited—Smugglers’ Dodges—A Suit of Tea—Deceptive Rigs—An East Indianan—A 11 Reverend” Smuggler—The Talc of a Stuhble-ficld—False Bottoms—Smuggling Profits.
THE close of the old halcyon days of smuggling, and the opening of the new or “ scientific ” period, date from 1816, the last year of the great French war. The reasons are not hard to seek why all measures taken by the Government up to that time had miserably failed to suppress the " trade.” Put briefly, they amount to this—there were no men for the work: England just then was fighting for her life. She wanted every ablebodied man she could get hold of. All the efforts of the press-gang barely sufficed to keep the fleet manned, and in some cases, as we have seen, whole batches of convicts were drafted into His Majesty's ships. With the army the case was even worse. In the thick of the Peninsular War we read of bounties of from £30 to £40 being paid for the enlistment of boys of fifteen, and even of gaol deliveries to fill up a regiment. Obviously the nation could spare no adequate force for coping with the smugglers.
To be sure, there were men whose duty it was to suppress tho “trade.” Even then the smuggler had against him the officers of Custom and Excise on shore, and the Revenue cutters afloat. But these, even if they did not do a little smuggling on their own account, were altogether too few for their business. The Exciseman, or “gauger,” became the laughing-stock of the country-side.
“The De’il cam’ fiddling thro’ the town, And danc’d awa’ wi’ the exciseman;
And ilka wife cry’d, ‘Auld Mahoun, We wish you luck o’ the prize man.’”
Digitized by LnOOQle
640
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
as Burns—himself an exciseman—sang; or, as an inferior rhymer put it more contemptuously “The Searcher, with his collar red,
He is both blithe and mellow. And, if he’d something in his head, He’d be a pretty fellow ; ”
while it must have been a very dull-witted coast population that could not build boats to outsail the
“in derision” (F W.
Revenue cutters. It was not even an uncommon thing in those days for a l»old smuggler, confident in the speed of his boat, to sail up close to a cutter, and, producing a tow-rope, dangle it over his stern in derision
But with the renewal of peace the Government could t mce more turn its attention to home affairs. Even so it found the suppression of smuggling a big job, and took no less than forty years to accomplish it
The first step taken was the establishment of a thorough blockade of the coasts of Kent and Sussex. A man-of-war, the Jtamillies, was stationed in the Downs ; another, the Hyperion, at
Newhaven, in Sus-
sex. Their crews
were landed and quartered by detachments in the Martello towers along the coast Where towers were not available, a sort of barracks was built, and these “ blockade stations ” are used by the coastguard at the present day—of course, with some alterations. In this blockade service we have the origin of our modern coastguard.
Digitized by
Google
THE PREVENTIVE WATER GUARD.
641
These blockade stations were commanded by lieutenants in the Royal Navy, a large number of whom had been thrown out of employment by the close of the war; and the entire force was under naval discipline.
But little good could be done by blockading one bit of coast, and leaving the rest open to the smuggler. As Commander Shore puts it, " Obviously, it was useless locking the front door if the back entrance and all the windows were left open." The Government, therefore, soon began to extend this principle of blockade — though in a modified form — round
the whole British seaboard. They did ready to their hand—the old Revenue cutter service.
A number of men were detached from the Revenue cutters to form boats' crews at the chief smuggling centres, and to parade the coast in their boats by night. After a while these “ preventive boats ” were placed on a different footing. The boats’ crews were made permanent, and the men billeted ashore — in hired lodgings, if possible; but very often the inhabitants of the smuggling port would not let the preventive men have a house to live in at any price, and in that case they were housed in old hulks, or “ watch vessels." As in the case of the Kent and Sussex blockade, the officers in command of these boats
so by developing the force that lay
CUASTGUAKD SBXTKT, 1831.
were chiefly naval lieutenants. The crews, however, were a poor lot. Almost anybody seems to have been taken. An old coastguardsman told Commander Shore that “ he could mind, when a boy, seeing a six-oared galley going off to board the cutters, the men going floppity-flop with their oars one after the other, just like a lot of ploughboys.” In official documents, the force was now, for the first time, called “ The Preventive Water Guard."
But we must digress for a moment to speak of a branch of the preventive service not yet mentioned, namely, the Riding Officers. This force —if force it can be called, for it was entirely inadequate — may be traced back for a couple of centuries. As early as 1698 we find 299 riding officers appointed to check the export smuggling of wool on the south-east coast. These men were, at first, civilians. After the war they were allowed to call in a mounted branch of the army—the dragoons—to help them. But these soldiers naturally hated being at the beck and call of a civilian; they were often hand in glove with the smugglers; and sometimes, it is to be feared, did a little smuggling on their own account when the riding officer was in
41
Digitized by Google
642
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
bed. In 1822, therefore, civilians were declared no longer eligible for this branch of the service, and appointments were confined to persons “ to be selected from cavalry regiments by the general commanding - in - chief.” At the same time the Treasury handed over the whole service to the Board of Customs. To quote the exact words: “ The whole of the forces for the prevention of smuggling, consisting of the Revenue cruisers, preventive water guard, and riding officers, shall be consolidated, and be placed, in like manner as the riding officers are at present, under the direction of the Board of Customs.” ‘
A capital picture of the preventive officer, and his ways, and his acuteness, will be found in one of Mr. Hardy’s “Wessex Tales.” The inhabitants of Nether-Mynton (which is Mr. Hardy’s name for Overmoyne, a little village on the high-road from Dorchester to Wareham) had managed to carry inland a number of tubs of brandy from a smuggling lugger in Lullstead (Luiworth) Cove. Unfortunately, as they entered the village one of the men let a couple of kegs fall on the road, one of them being stove in by the blow. The riding officer, with his men, was quickly on the smugglers’ track The tubs, indeed, were all hidden before he arrived at the village that night; but the tell-tale smell in the road arrested his attention, and he pulled up. Early next morning he began, with his men, to search the village. To quote Mr. Hardy: “ There was never such a tremendous sniffing known as that which took place in Nether-Mynton parish and its vicinity this day. All was done methodically, and mostly on hands and knees. At different hours of the day they had different plans. From daybreak to breakfast-time the officers used their sense of smell in a direct and straightforward manner only, pausing nowhere but at such places as the tubs might be supposed to be secreted in nt that very moment, pending their
removal on the were—	following night	Among tho places	tested and examined
“Hollow trees Potato-graves Fuel-houses Bedrooms	Apple-lofts Cupboards Clock-cases Chimney-flues	Rainwater-batts Pigsties Culverts Hedgerows.	Faggot-ricks Haystacks Coppers and ovens
“ After breakfast they recommenced with renewed			vigour, taking a new
line: that is to say, directing their attention to clothes that might be supposed to have come in contact with the tubs in their removal from the
Womens shawls and gowns Smiths’ and shoemakers’ aprons Knee-naps and hedging-gloves
Tarpaulins
Scarecrows.
shore, such garments being usually tainted with the spirit, owing to its oozing between the staves. They now sniffed at—
“ Smock-frocks	•
Old shirts and waistcoats Coats and hats Breeches and leggings.
Market-cloaks
Digitized by Google
A GREAT SEARCH.
C43
“ And, as soon as the mid-day meal was over, they pushed their search into places where the spirits might have been thrown away in alarm—
“ Horse ]tends	Mixens	Sinks in yards
Stable-drains	Wet ditches	Road-scrapings
Cinder-heaps	Cesspools	Back-door gutters.
" But still these indefatigable excisemen discovered nothing more than the original tell-tale smell in the road. . . .
“ ‘ I’ll tell ye what it is, men,’ said Latimer (the riding officer), about three o’clock in the afternoon: ' we must begin over again. Find them tubs I will'
“ The men, who had been hired by the day, looked at their hands and knees, muddy with creeping on all fours so frequently, and rubbed their noses, as if they had almost had enough of it, for the quantity of bad air which had passed into each one’s nostril had rendered it nearly as insensible as a flue. However, after a moment’s hesitation, they prepared to start anew, except three, whose power of smell had quite succumbed under the excessive wear and tear of the day.”
Meanwhile the villagers, men, women and children, had betaken themselves quietly to the top of the church tower, where they lay on their stomachs on the leads, or peeped cautiously through the embrasures of the parapet At length the excisemen unearthed thirty tubs from under the gallery stairs in the church tower. These were brought out, one by one, into the middle of the churchyard, and a watch was set over them. The rest of the searchers, still watched from the church tower, began to explore a neighbouring orchard.
“ The interest of the smugglers in the next manceuvres of their enemies became painfully intense. Only about thirty tubs had been secreted in the lumber of the tower, but seventy were hidden in the orchard, making up all that they had brought ashore as yet, the remainder of the cargo having been tied to a sinker and dropped overboard for another night’s operations. The excisemen, having re-entered the orchard, acted as if they were positive that here lay hidden the rest of the tubs, which they were determined to find before nightfall They spread themselves out round the field, and advancing on all fours as before, went anew round every appletree in the enclosure. The young tree in the middle again led them to pause, and at length the whole company gathered there in a way which signified that a second chain of reasoning had led to the same results as the first.
“ When they had examined the sod hereabouts for some minutes, one of the men rose, ran to a disused porch of the church, where tools were kept, and returned with the sexton’s pickaxe and shovel, with which they set to work.
Digitized by
Google
644
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
“ The grass was so green and uninjured that it was difficult to believe that it had been disturbed. The smugglers were too interested to reply, and presently they saw, to their chagrin, the officers stand two on each side of the tree, and, stooping and applying their hands to the soil, they bodily lifted the tree and the turf around it The apple-tree now showed itself to be growing in a shallow box, with handles for lifting at each of the four sides. Under the site of the tree a square hole was revealed, and an exciseman went and looked down.”
The tubs were then taken out, and the men began tearing up the
Night Duty.
COASTGUARD COSTUMES OF THE PRESENT DAY.
Rough Wuthlm.
turf and breaking in the sides, till the cellar was wholly dismantled and shapeless, the apple-tree lying with its roots to the air.
“ But the hole, which had in its time held so much contraband merchandise, was never completely filled up, either then or afterwards, a depression in the greensward marking the spot to this day.”
We have come to that point (1822) in the history of the preventive service when its three component parts—the Revenue cutters, the preventive boats, and the riding officers—were consolidated into one force, under the direction of the Board of Customs. In 1829 we come upon another important regulation, that “ No person is to be admitted as a boatman in the coastguard
Digitized by
Google
THE EARLY COASTGUARD.
645
service unless he is twenty and under thirty years of age, nor unless lie has served six years at sea, or seven years’ apprenticeship in fishing-boats.” The force now received the title of “ Coastguard,” which it has kept to this day, and all orders were issued from the "Coastguard Office, Custom House, London.”
The routine of a coastguard station at that time was somewhat as follows;—At sundown the entire crew would assemble in the watch-house, fully equipped for their night’s duty, each having a brace of heavy pistols, a cutlass,
‘*THB TUBB WEBB THEN TAKEN OUT ” (p. 6M).
several rounds of ammunition, and a blue light for giving the alarm. Uniforms for night work were not considered necessary; indeed, they were rather discouraged, as attracting notice. The crew being assembled, each man was told off for the guard he was to take charge of and was sent at once to his post. No man was allowed to know beforehand where his station would be, nor was he allowed to communicate even with his family after it was told him. Tho guards would' be changed at least once during the night, and each guard was visited twice at uncertain times, and without notice, by the chief officer of the station,
Digitized by GOOQle
04G
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
In 1831 Government removed the coast blockade from the coast of Kent and Sussex, and superseded it with the coastguard, which by this time was working very well In 1845 smuggling was so far suppressed that people began to ask whether the large force of men in the Revenue service might not be rendered available for national defence in emergency. This notion first took shape (1845) in the instruction that "No seaman is to be appointed in future to the coastguard who will not enter into a written agreement to serve on board any of Her Majesty’s ships, in the event of his services being required; but he is to be given to understand that he will not be called upon to serve unless in cases of emergency.”
So the coastguard had now two capacities. It was (1) a preventive service, and (2) a reserve for the fleet in war time. In 1848 the men began to be drilled in gunnery, and when the Crimean War broke out in 1854 their value as a naval reserve was very clearly shown. With the return of peace, the force was absorbed into the Navy. In 1857 the old Custom House flag was discontinued, and the naval flags and signal code brought into use; and the districts were placed under the orders of captains or lieutenants of the Royal Navy. At the present day, therefore, the coastguard service is not only essentially naval, but may be called a branch of the Navy itself
In the game of coastguard against smuggler, the smuggler had the worst of it. But while the struggle lasted he developed considerable ingenuity, and, discarding his old rough-and-ready methods, raised his trade to something very like a fine art.
Generally speaking, a smuggling transaction resolved itself into three operations. (1) The goods had to be brought over; (2) they had to be landed; (3) they had to be carried inland.
So, too, the men engaged fell into three classes. (1) The freighter; (2) the boatmen; (3) the tub-carriers, or porters, or land smugglers, who cleared the cargo and carried the goods inland.
And as there were three operations; so there were three lines of defence to be eluded. (1) The Revenue cutters afloat; (2) the coastguard; and (3) the mounted guard. Of these, the coastguard was by far the most formidable. The smugglers had, of course, the natural advantages of attack over defence. They could choose their own time, and place. And with these advantages, it was not really hard to elude the Revenue cutters. But to land a cargo on a regularly-patrolled coast was a very* different matter. A direct run might sometimes be brought off, if the coastguard were caught napping; but usually more cautious measures were taken, as we shall now describe.
The smuggling boat would time its departure from a foreign port so as to sight the British coast just before dusk, dissimulating her real purpose by mixing with any fishing-boats who happened to be out, or lowering sail till darkness fell. Then she would stand in as close as she dared, and would
Digitized by LnOOQle
SINKING A '‘CROP."
647
sink all her cargo to the bottom of the sea on well-defined bearings, leaving the task of picking them up afterwards and “ working ” them inland to local men The method of sinking was simple enough. Commander Shore thus describes it: “ The tubs, which it must be premised were always supplied by the merchants abroad ready fitted with rope slings, were secured, at intervals of a few feet, along a stout rope, called the ' sinking rope ’ or 'drift line;’ between each tub a stone, sufficiently large to sink the tub, was attached to the same rope, the whole being hung round the vessel outside by slight fastenings from the gunwale, with stouter ones at bow and stern, ready to be cut away and slipped at a moment’s notice. To reduce the risk as much as possible, the preparations for sinking were usually completed before the smuggling boat approached the coast, so that in case of alarm the cargo could be instantly slipped. ... A ‘crop’ sunk in deep water, provided it was secured in a workmanlike manner, would lie for several weeks without damage; but, as goods were sometimes put down hurriedly in bad situations, tubs were often ‘ chafed ’ oft' the sinking rope, and, by drifting about or washing ashore, betrayed the presence of the crop to the ever-watchful coastguard.”
As a rule the contents of the tubs suffered no deterioration from submersion, but occasionally—it mostly depended on the nature of the bottom —after very long submersion the spirits turned bad, and a crop of this sort was known amongst coastguardsmen in the West of England as “ stinkibus,” from the offensive smell given off. The feelings of the men on hauling in a crop of “ stinkibus,” after “ creeping ” for several consecutive days, can be more easily imagined than described.
The "crop” having been thus sunk, the next operation was "working” it—i.e. getting it quietly ashore; and this was left to the local smugglers. Though it was always a risky business, the risk varied. Suppose, for instance, the tubs were sunk near a place where seaweed was frequently cut and carried: it would be comparatively easy to run a few tubs ashore under each cartload of weed. Another very favourite device was to sink a crop in a place where crabbing was largely followed; so that while the other boats were working the crab-pots, the smuggler would quietly pull up the end of the sinking line, take off two or three tubs, stow them underneath the gear at the bottom of the boat, row ashore, and, perhaps, run the liquor in broad daylight. But, off an open coast, where no fishing operations could be used to cloak the design, it was a more delicate business. In this case the attempt must be made after dark; and often, to delude the coastguard, the boat would bo rowed many miles in a wrong direction. Then, having gained an offing, the boat would put about and make as quickly as possible for the real spot. Bearings would be taken, and “ creepers ” dropped and dragged to and fro along the bottom until they hitched in the goods. If the bearings were vague, or the goods had drifted from their position, “sweeping” would
Digitized by LnOOQle
648
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
be resorted to. In " sweeping,” two boats were rowed along at a little distance from each other, dragging the bight of a rope between them along the bottom. As soon as the
goods were hooked, they were hauled up, cut away from the drift line, and stowed in the boat If time allowed, the sinking line? and anchors would also be saved; but very often the smugglers would let these go in their hurry.
But, after all, the cream of smuggling was a direct run on
CHOP rMPAMD JOB SINKING.
CHOP SUNK IN MEI' WATER.
money to purchase a cargo of spirits. There were no tele-
a large scale. We will suppose that a freighter has started off for a foreign port with enough,
CREEP ERB, (Front Draiinji^j fey Cornyn jtiier Stare J
• *. r S*nd arotpen. d. Rock creeper. C/. Cant I pad**.
USCLCatlXU BOAT WITH TUBS BLVNO FOR SISKINS.
graphs or steamship services in those days by wh i c h rapid notice might be
given of any alteration of plan; therefore, the whole campaign had to be settled beforehand—the time of the proposed run, the place, and, perhaps, two or three alternative places, in case the coastguard should get wind of the intention.
But, of course, in such calculations a great deal had to be left to chance. Delays might arise in shipping the cargo, winds might prove contrary, etc.; and, therefore, it required a very nice judgment, and a study of many things, such as strength and direction of
Digitized by LnOOQle
“WORKING" A CARGO.
649
wind, set of tide, etc., to calculate the time of a vessel’s arrival, Nevertheless, old smugglers could generally guess pretty well; and during the afternoon before a run the responsible people on shore are on the look out. They have
“ CLIMBED VP THE CLIFFS ” (p 653).
already got together a sufficient number of porters or tub-carriers from among the labourers in the neighbourhood, promising them live shillings each, perhaps, for their night’s work. In the early darkness these men have gathered to the rendezvous from all directions, and are now hidden in some old barn or farm building at a little distance from the shore. The run will take place,
Digitized by
Google
650
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
if possible, early in the night. Long waiting is to be avoided on more than one account. The men get restless, and may begin to quarrel, and the coast* guard may bo near. Two or three old hands are down on the beach, waiting for the moment to give the signal.
Meanwhile, in the dusk or darkness, the smuggling boat is standing in as near as she dares. The moon will not be up for some hours yet, and guiding the boat in is ticklish work. The man to whom it is entrusted is known as the “spotsman." In case of any danger from the coastguard, the men who are watching the approaches to the landing-place will at once give warning. The flash of a dark lantern will be enough, or a “flink” of flint upon steel—so acute is the spotsman’s eyesight that ho will easily discern this even when a mile distant.
On this occasion, however, the coast is clear. The vessel, with her tubs festooned around her, stands in to the. suitable distance. The sinking-stones will not be needed to-night. They are hastily cut away from the sinkingrope, to the end of which a fresh rope is now made fast A small boat or punt now rows quickly ashore with this rope, the tub-carriers seize hold of it and pull, and the whole cargo is thus “ rafted ” ashore.
And now the whole affair is over in five or ten minutes. Each man seizes a pair of tubs and slings 'them over his shoulder by the rope-slings with which they are ready fitted, and the whole party makes off inland at its bast speed. The danger is by no means over. To be sure, the most delicate part of the business has been accomplished. But the tub-carrier is a stupid fellow compared with the master-smuggler. It is quite possible that, before the party has gone very far inland, a cask of the spirit will be broached, and half a dozen men drunk and roaring indiscreetly. Also, these country bumpkins have no resources when pursued by the coastguard. Probably, at the first alarm they will drop the tubs and run to save their skins. Of course, runs have been “ forced ” before now—that is, carried through in open defiance of the coastguard, with a fighting gang to protect the tubcarriers ; and as late os the year 1833 wo read of a desperate affray that lasted through the greater part of a November night, and ended in the complete rout of the smugglers, tho death of four, and the seizure of almost all their cargo. But in this case we are dealing with a “ forced ” run. Our tub-carriers are yokels, with no great vice in them apart from their misguided notions of public honesty, but intensely stupid, and apt to drink when they see liquor. Therefore, it is wise not to let them carry the tubs too far; and, therefore, cellars and hiding-places have been provided at an easy distance—in orchards, farm-buildings, inns, and even churches. The casual tourist, as he proceeds upon his holiday coast-walk to-day, treads unsuspectingly over numbers of these hiding-places, and scarcely passes a farm that docs not possess its private cellar, often so ingeniously hidden that new tenants themselves live and die in the house without dreaming of the existence of such a “ hide.”
Digitized by LnOOQle
" KUN TO SAVE THEIK SKINS " (p, 650),
11
Digitized by LnOOQle
Digitized by
Google
A CLEVER “SCOTSMAN.'
651
The goods, then, arc landed and safely stowed. It still remains for the smuggling boat to beat a retreat with all speed. Not only must her men lift anchor and set sail: they have to remove every trace of their la to business before they reach port A bit of left-handed rope (French rope is left-handed), or even a piece of French bread, might tell an awkward tale, and the penalties are severe. The "Laws for the Prevention of Smuggling” of the year 1816 struck at everything concerned in a smuggling transaction. All vessels and boats, all horses and carriages, employed in landing or removing contraband goods, were forfeit to the Crown; and these, after being duly condemned by law, were sold, and the proceeds distributed in fixed proportion as prize-money among the seizers. Even to be caught loitering near the coast was dangerous. “Any person loitering within five miles of the sea-coast or any navigable river, with intent, as is suspected, to assist in running goods, is to be brought before a justice; and, if unable to give a satisfactory account of his calling or employment, shall be committed to the House of Correction, to be whipped and kept to hard labour for any time not exceeding one month. And if any person shall desire time for making it clear that he was not concerned in any fraudulent practices, the justice may commit him to gaol until he shall make proof to the satisfaction of the justice.”
As a story, in some respects typical, in others exceptional, of a “direct” nin, we may select the following. A Mullyon man, a "spotsman” of great repute, was bringing over a cargo of brandy from Roscoff. His repeated successes had piqued the preventive men, and these, getting wind of his departure for France, determined to make every effort to capture him on his return. To this end the Revenue cutter was kept busily cruising off tho coast, while the land force was augmented by relays from far and near. Our spotsman had employed a Mount's Bay boat for his voyage; and one fine evening, in spite of the strict look-out, he landed his cargo of kegs at the foot of the cliffs, at a spot called “The Chair,” near Mullyon. He then sent off the boat with two hands, while he himself, with another of his men, strolled up the cliffs to look out for his “friends.” These were gathered at the top of tho cliffs, and in the very act of lighting a large fire to warn him off the coast. They were, therefore, a good deal astonished when he walked in upon them; still more so when he told them that “Cousin Jacky” Smuggler's slang for cognac) was, so far, safe on the rocks at “The Chair.” No time was lost by the party in repairing thither, and on their arrival so quietly was everything done, that they actually heard the thump of the bows of the preventive gig as she ran into their own retreating and empty boat With all speed the smugglers laid hold of the kegs and carried off as many as they were able, stowing them for a time in the adit of a deserted wine shaft, and leaving the remainder on the rocks to take their chance.
Meanwhile, the preventive gig had carried off the smuggler boat to the Revenue cutter, and, taking the two men on board, made her fast to the
Digitized by GOOQle
G52
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
cutter’s stern. This done, they returned to search for the cargo, but in vain. Although they actually landed within a hundred yards of the remaining kegs, they were not sufficiently wide-awake to discover them, and, after a fruitless search, they pulled back to the Revenue cutter for the night — in no very sweet temper.
As soon as they were gone, the smuggling party returned to “ The Chair, ’
and shouldered all of the remaining kegs except two, which had somehow broken loose from their sling-ropes and were not easily handled. While the men climbed up the cliffs with their burden, morning broke sufficiently to reveal the Revenue cutter lying at a little distance at anchor, with their own boat made fast to her stern.
The smugglers now sent word to some other friends at Mullyon that, though almost the whole cargo had been safely landed, there were yet two tubs that might be recovered. Promptly a fishing-boat put out from the cove, and, under pretence of “ whiffing,” slowly passed down along under “ The Chair,” and in a very short time had the rest of “Cousin Jacky” on board. Scarcely had they got the two kegs comfortably stowed, when along came the Revenue
Digitized by knOOQle
“ FISH VERY SLIGHT.”
653
TI N# BECUKBD TO AN IKON HAS SUErKNnBD VII MB A BOAT. DIBCOVHBBD IN RAMSGATE HABBOUB, 1823.
cutter’s gig again, this time engaged in “ creeping ” the bottom, in tho fond hope of discovering some of the contraband liquor. Of course, the fishermen’s whole attention was absorbed in their fishing.
"What sport, lads?”
called out one of the coastguard.
“ Why, fish is very slight this morning; very slight, indeed ■ ” Then, after a short pause—
“ But we don’t seem to be doing so bad, neither I"
After an hour or two, our friend the spotsman— the whole of his cargo being safe by this time—sauntered back once more to the cliffs, and came upon some of the supernumerary coast-
^rniMH‘«»®iMSii$^^ f '«tvw*r «r>r W
b-j '- tW^WWWW
It wis so weighted by iron plates that the tub* at the top juat touched the surface of the water. The raft won sent floating with Die flood tide, and the grapnel* held It when it reached shallow water.
KA FT DISCOVERED IN LANUBION HARBOUR, 1833.
guard force, who had
Ti.t^i ”'(
INGENIOUS CONTRIVANCE DISCOVERED IN LANGSTON HARBOUR IN 1835.
(a) The raft of tube.
(b) Floating mark under water.
to) Floating mark just showing above water in the eddy tide, but covered over in the full strength of the tide
been brought thither for the express purpose of catching him in the very act. Said he, “ You may go home again now, boys, if you mind to. I won’t keep ’ee here no longer ! “
The punishment for a smuggler, when caught, was thus fixed by the Act of 1816:
“ Every person found assisting in unshipping any goods may be arrested, and, if
(From Drumag; by Comma xdrr S/iGrt.)
convicted, is to be
Digitized by LnOOQle
654 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
committed to hard labour in the House of Correction for any term not exceeding three years, nor less than one year." But it is added, “ If any person so convicted is approved of as fit to serve His Majesty, the justices may adjudge him to serve as a soldier or sailor for a term of five years.” A certain number, of course, chose the latter punishment, and we have seen that in many cases they served their country well But, as a rule, they preferred to be sent to prison, for the prison officials, like everybody else, had a sneaking goodwill towards smugglers, and there was always a chance that the sentence would be remitted; whereas, when a man was once sent afloat there was very little likelihood of his regaining his liberty until his term of service expired, especially if his ship had been sent to a distant station. An old smuggler, who had served his term in Bodmin Gaol, told Commander Shore that on one occasion Lord Exmouth visited the gaol, and, on being informed that a party of fine, active young fellows were smugglers, told them he was sorry to see them there, as he had several smugglers in his ship at Algiers, and they were some of the best men he had on board.
As the coastguard began to prevail over the traffic, the old methods of running contraband cargoes and landing them in out-of-the-way coves and beaches gradually gave way to more subtle ways of cheating the Custom House. So far we have dealt mainly with the smuggling of tea and spirits; but by the Act of 1816 quite a large number of goods were forbidden to be imported or used under any conditions whatever. Here is the list, taken ■from the “ Table of Goods Wholly Prohibited to be luiported, or to be Worn, or to be Used, in Great Britain”:—
Gold or silver brocade.
Cocoanut sheila, or husks without their nuts.
Foreign embroidery.
Manufactures of gold, or silver, or metal.
Ribbons, laces, and girdles.
Chocolate, or cocoa paste.
Calicoes, printed or dyed in Persia, China, or East Indies.
Gloves, or mits of silk or leather.
Foreign needlework.
Silks (wrought).
(All the above to be forfeited, and the importers fined.)
Other goods, such as spirits, tea, and tobacco, could be imported, indeed, but were subject to ruinous duties.
Now for a few of the dodges by which these were carried past the Customs.
And here again we are indebted to Commander Shore’s book, which is particularly valuable on this branch of tho subject Let us begin with tobacco. As far back as 1820 we hear of it concealed inside ships' hawsers. The tobacco was first made up into a rope of two strands, and then a hawser of three strands was laid over it, so that the deception could be detected by cutting or unlaying the hawser. Two years later we find at Flushing a regular manufactory of tobacco made up into ropes of ail sizes, which, being slightly washed with rum, had every appearance of being genuine hempen
Digitized byGooQle
SMUGGLERS' TRICKS. 655
stuff. In 1842 some tobacco was seized at Portsmouth which had been cut to the shape of a man’s shoe. Two years later we find it brought across in hollow oak planks, and so tightly pressed in as to require chisel and hammer to separate it from the wood. And yet later again a still more ingenious method was hit on, viz., inside blocks, the sheaves of which were discovered to be made of tobacco* In 1821 an ingenious method was discovered of smuggling silk goods inside hams: “ the meat and bones of hams were scooped out very clean, except at the knuckle and the extremity of the thick end. The skin was then lined with calico, the silk packed very tight and hard in paper, covered over with oiled sill?, and deposited within; the interstices between the packages being stuffed .with rags to plump it up, the orifice then very neatly closed, and the whole rubbed with dirt and sawdust so as to effectually conceal the aperture.”
A man would carry through the Custom House about 30 lbs. of tea concealed upon his person. He would carry some in a cotton bag that fitted into the crown of his hat, more in a kind of fluted waistcoat fitting round his chest, more again in a pair of thick thigh pads fitted inside his trowsers, and yet more in a large “dress-improver.”
Boats were caught with goods stowed inside iron ballast, cast hollow for the purpose: others with hollow masts and yards, made of tin and painted to resemble wood, and containing tobacco or spirits.
Boats had the most ingenious tricks for concealing their identity. Many were painted and numbered to resemble pilot-cutters. Others had two sets of sails, of different cut and colour. For instance, the sloop Daniel and William, 30 tons, of Portsmouth, used, as a rule, to be seen with white sails and a gaff-headed topsail; but, when on a smuggling trip, she often carried a suit of tan sails and a jib-topsail. But the boat best equipped for what, in the theatrical profession, are known as “ lightning changes ” was the Sarah Jacobe, a Dutch smuggling cutter of 70 tons, captured by the Chance Revenue cruiser in October, 1843, off Ardglass, in Ireland. “ She was supplied with spars, crosstrees, stump topmast, and all fittings to turn her into a cutter, sloop, dandy, or trawler, at will in a few moments. She was also provided with shifting quarterpieces, to ship and unship for disguise. The name of the vessel was on a shifting board, to fasten on with staples and toggles; and the white streak, which was still wet, had evidently been painted on her at sea.” Commander Shore also mentions a curious case at Woolwich in 181G, when advantage was taken of condemned Government stores to introduce contraband goods of immense value. “ In one packet alone, marked ‘ Returned Congreve Rockets,’ were goods value £7,000, for one man. In the mortars were laces, gloves, cambrics, etc. Many people had long supplied
* It is, perhaps, hardly necessary to explain that the “ sheave ” of a block is a wheel made of hard wood or metal, travelling inside the shell or outside part of the block.
Digitized by LnOOQle
656 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
themselves and friends with wines in this way, and their wives with finery! This was the only vessel—she was an East India ship, by the way—which had been detected, but the trade had long and successfully been carried on to a great extent. The secret was discovered by a carpenter on the voyage home in securing the packages. He informed the Custom House on arrival, but ten days elapsed before any inspection took place, and then much had been landed. The informer got about £1,000 reward.” •
While on the subject of dodges, we may mention a famous one played by a West Country smuggler, a small farmer. He was known to have run a small cargo of goods, and the coastguard, though they had failed to catch him in the act, were quick enough upon his traces to prevent his smuggling the liquor inland. They knew it was concealed somewhere about his farm, and, after making one or two unsuccessful searches, they determined to try the system of blockade. Night by night, therefore, for weeks, all the surrounding roads were watched by sentries, and by day the whole farm was carefully swept by telescopes from the look-out station. Meanwhile—the season was autumn—the farmer composedly went on with his business, which just then happened to be the clearing of stubble. Day by day, these stubble heaps grew, until at noon one day, the wind being in the right quarter, smoke began to rise from a hundred different points about the farm, and soon hung over the fields in dense clouds, against which the telescopes on the heights were powerless. Almost before it dawned on the coastguard that they had been tricked, the farmer had hoisted his tubs into farm waggons and driven quietly off, no one could see whither.
Even the clerical profession has not been altogether above cheating the Customs. In a previous chapter we have seen how a Cornish parson could take his part in a run of goods. Compare with his case that of a respected minister of Minnesota, who, on landing at New York the other day, signed the usual declaration that he had no articles liable to duty. But the Customs inspector had his doubts, and a search in the reverend gentleman’s trunks revealed, amongst other contraband goods, silk umbrellas, ladies’ underclothing, perfumery, and 5,000 cigars. The trunks had false bottoms.
This should bring us to the most successful contrivance of all—the use of false bottoms and similar hiding-places in the vessels themselves. But the different devices in this way were nearly endless, and we must lie content to give one or two diagrams which explain themselves, and to refer the reader for an elaborate study of such devices to the work so frequently mentioned in the course of this narrative.
One question will naturally suggest itself—What were the profits on smuggling ? Accurate information on this point is almost impossible to procure ; but we know that it was a common theory among smugglers that if they could save one cargo out of three they were fairly well paid for all their expense and trouble. A freighter who intended to run a cargo would
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE SPEEDWELL. OF COLCHESTER.
8cuttle-hole cut in side of ship and leading tn false bottom for transference
of smuggled cargo.
Ie) Tuba between ditto, (r) After-bulkbead.
M)Tubs under cabin. (/) Cargo of coal.
THE TAM OHM A XT ER.
« TONS. OF PLYMOUTH.
(A) Section of Verhel, showing Falhk Bottom on.
( u six tiinl- r' -'ll tach si.h-. fast. h,.| i.> th. keel, and bilge, 4 fret above keeL
(B) Transverse Section, showing False Bottom (with Tuna in Position).
(b) Nails through false timbers.
(r) Sheathing of |-inch planking nailed to each timber, finely edged above, forward and aft; the tubs being built io and stowed fore-and-aft in the chambers.
THE CHARLES AXD HARM AH. OF PORTSMOUTH.
(a) Concealment 9 feet long, holding 200 gallons of spirit ; (b) Lork to let water into well; (• ) Plug to fit in pipe ; (tT) Hole to start spirit* into concealment; (e) Cock under cabin store tn draw off spirits ; (/) Cock and pipe from well through concealment to let out water.
(1) False keel; (2) 2-lnch planks, three on each side, fastened at right angles to the keel, to keep ths tuba in position, and to which the covering of (-inch planks was nailed; (3) Transverse section.
MODES OP CONCEALMENT OF SMUGGLED GOODS ON 8] 11 PRO A HP.	(From PtuiHr^t fry CUMNMIufer Store.)
658
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
get a certain number of adventurers together, each man venturing for a certain number of tubs at £2 per tub. Of this, £1 would be paid down for working expenses, and £1 on delivery of tubs. Now a tub, or half-anker, when full, held four gallons of brandy, costing from 5s. to 6s. a gallon in France, and no less than 36s. a gallon in England, duty paid, the duty then being 32s. a gallon. So, if the run were successful, tho venturers obtained, for £2 'a tub, liquor which, duty paid, would have cost them £6 a tub. If the enterprise failed, they only lost the £1 per tub which they had advanced for working expenses. The freighter, of course, made his money by purchasing the tubs in France at an average cost of 18s. or £1 a tub and seUing them to the adventurers at £2. The crew of the smuggling boat might or might not have a share in the venture, but would be paid for their services at a price agreed on beforehand. Twenty-five pounds per man was a common price. Profits such as these, together with the satisfaction it undoubtedly gave to men’s sporting instincts, will explain why smuggling was such a popular pursuit with our forefathers.
Digitized by LnOOQle
CHAPTER XXVIII.
A CHAPTER ON NAVIGATION.
Early Navigation—Charts—Mercator's Projection—The Lead-Line—The Hand Lino and Dipsey Lead— Heaving the Lead—A Sounding Machine—The Mariner's Compass—Its Antiquity—Description of Compass—Tho North and Magnetic North—Variation of Compass—Deviation of Compass—Vessels Lost through Defective Compasses—The Story of the Apollo Frigate—The Compass Observatory at Deptford—'* Swinging "—Admiralty Standard Compass.
NAVIGATION may be roughly defined as tho art of steering a course so as to bring your ship to the port you desire to reach ■ it implies also that at any given time you arc able to discover exactly where your vessel is.	.
The old Greek and Phoenician seamen—the “ ancients,” as the history books used to call them—are usually supposed to have conveyed their ships from port to port by hugging the land and steering by the stars at night. Occasionally, no doubt, they were blown out to sea, and then we must suppose that they got back by the help of the sun and the stars.
But, obviously, seamen who keep within sight of shore are only in the infancy of their art. It is only when a ship loses sight of land that tho importance of navigation begins. Now, accurate navigation requires a number of accurate appliances, besides some rather involved calculations, and both appliances and calculations are the outcome of long experience. So that one stands lost in amazement to-day at the hardihood of those old navigators who doubled the Cape or pushed out across the Atlantic, and at the cleverness with which they somehow managed to bring their ships to port. By the nature of things, the earliest of them could have no charts or maps, for you must cross a sea and visit a land before you can make a map of either. And when the charts were made, they were often about as accurate as the human figure drawn by a child on a blackboard when his teacher’s back is turned. As for the famous " three L’s ”—lead, latitude, and look-out—they
Digitized by
Google
660
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
CHART OF PART OF THE SOLENT.
must undoubtedly have kept the last-mentioned ; and the hand - lead, at any rate (to use Mr. Clark Russell’s words j, is probably “ coeval with the first sailor, black, or white, or yellow, that ever felt himself under the necessity to discover whether the water shoaled under his little ship as she sailed along. For how better should a man find the depth of water than by
attaching a weight to the end of a line, dropping it over the side, and then measuring the extent of line the weight carried with it ? This is the theory
of the hand-lead, simply because Adam never went to sea, but it is quite likely to be as old as Noah.” The last of the three L’s, latitude, was with them extremely vague, and for longitude they went perforce by guesswork. They had, indeed, the compass, which is said to be as old as Chinese civilisation.
and of the deep-sea lead, too. It is not so old as Adam,
AN BAILLY ATTEMPT AT MAP AND CHART-MAKING.
Digitized by^OOQlC
GUESSWORK.
661
But their knowledge of the “ variation ” of the compass was imperfect, and the instrument itself, as manufactured in those times, was a very primitive appliance. And yet they managed excellently well, hove their log, turned their hour-
THROWING THE LEAD.
glasses, and arrived in due course, “ their ships covered with barnacles and themselves with glory.”
It is proposed in this chapter to take the chief requisites of navigation in order and explain them as clearly as may be without going too far into scientific detail
Digitized by GOOQle
662
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
I.—Charts.
If a ship is bound on a foreign voyage, tho first necessary will be a chart of the seas that she is going to cross. A chart is a map of tho sea. Just as a map of the land shows the various mountains and rivers, as well as the towns, villages, woods, roads, and other features of the country, so a chart shows the various sands and rocks at the bottom of the sea, the different soundings, ail the lights and buoys, the coast-line and leading marks.
KEDUCED FACMMTtE OF CH ABT PREPARED BY CAP-
TAIN HODGES, HYDBOOBAFHEB TO CAPTAIN cook’s expedition.
The soundings marked upon a chart show the depth of water at any given place. The depths are everywhere marked in small figures, and, except in very shallow places, where the figures are specially marked as feet, the depths are always given in fathoms—a fathom, of course, being six feet.
The depths of water marked are those at low-water spring tides; that is to say, the very least amount of water there can ever be at the place in question. Very often there will be a good deal more ; but, if a captain sees five fathoms marked on the chart, he knows for certain that he can count upon finding five fathoms there at the very least.
In England there is a hydrographical department connected with the Navy, which is constantly employed in making and correcting charts, and which employs officers to make observations for this purpose
in different parts of the world. Many of the most famous voyages in history —those of Captain Cook, for example—were undertaken partly with a view to chart-making. Cook was one of the finest marine surveyors that ever lived. He died in 1779, and to this day his charts for some parts of the world have not been superseded, and his recorded observations have more than once saved us from hasty and incorrect alterations desired by modern navigators.
But, besides these Admiralty charts, a vessel must carry a chart of her own, upon which her progress is marked down from day to day. Now, as everybody knows, the earth is a sphere; and if you take a sphere or a globe and try to discover the course and distance between any two places, you will find it difficult and you would find it impossible in a map constructed
Digitized by^OOQlC
CHARTS.
663
on the globular projection. The early navigators had to contend with this difficulty, and they got over it by what they called a Plane Chart—that is by taking the earth as a flat surface and marking out the latitude and longitude in parallel and equidistant straight lines. Now we know that the parallels of latitude on the surface of the globe are everywhere equidistant, while the meridians, or lines of longitude, are furthest apart at the equator and draw close together as we approach the poles. And it is, therefore, clear that if we keep the parallels of latitude equidistant, while we widen out the meridians at the poles to the same distance that they have at the equator, we have made a distortion in only one direction, namely, in longitude, and our chart is bound to lead to errors in navigation.
This difficulty, however, was overcome by the discovery of Mercator’s Projection—so called from its inventor, Gerard Kauffmann, better known as Mercator (1512-1594). Drawing out a chart on which the distance between the parallels of latitude were widened to the same proportionate extent as the meridians had been widened, he preserved the relation between the different parts. In other words, this was one of the few cases in which two wrongs make one right: by distorting the map from top to bottom as well as from left to right, wo do, indeed, get a drawing in which the extent of land and water near the poles is out of all proportion when compared with the equatorial regions; but the distortion is made on a regular and intelligible scale, and wo get what is of most importance in navigation—-the relative direction from one part of the world to another, so that the track of a ship always steering the same course can be drawn as a straight line.
When a very small portion of the earth’s surface is to be represented, the old Plane Chart may be used, and will lead to no practical error; hence coasting charts are usually constructed in this manner. But the chart used for marking down a ship’s track over long distances will be a Mercator’s chart.
The soundings marked on the Admiralty charts arc of immense importance. Sometimes in thick weather a captain can only tell where ha is by means of soundings. He may know where he is within a few miles, but is not certain of his exact position. So he takes soundings, and the depth, with the character of the bottom, will at all events carry him some way towards finding his exact position on the chart So accurately, for instance, has the Channel been surveyed, that ships frequently feel their way up from the Lizard to the Nore in fogs so dense that they never catch a glimpse of the land.
This brings us to the second great appliance of navigation:—
II	.—The Lead.
Soundings are taken by means of the Lead-line ; that is to say, by a plummet of lead attached to a string and dropped over the side of a ship.
Digitized byVrOOQlC
Digitized by
&
THE WORLD ON MERCATOR'8 PROJECTION.
THE HAND LINE.
665
There are two sorts 20 fathoms long, and (2) more fathoms in length.
of lead-lines used by sailors—(1) the hand line, the deep-sea lead (pronounced “ dipsey ”), of 200 or
The Hand Line.—This, of course, is for use in shallow water. The hand
EXAMINING THE “ AMMINO " IN BAU WEATHER.
lead weighs from 7 lbs. to 14 lbs., is cylindrical in form, and widest at the bottom, where it is hollowed out to receive some sticky substance such as grease, or tallow, or soap (called the “arming”), so that when the lead strikes the bottom, the sand, or mud, or shells there will stick to the “arming,” and when the line is hauled iu one can see of what material the bottom is composed.
The lead is attached to a line from 20 to 25 fathoms long. Tins line
Digitized by LnOOQle
666
THE STORY OF THE BEA.
has indications at intervals of a fathom called "marks” and "deeps.” Those fathoms which are indicated, as with a piece of leather, a piece of red or white or blue bunting, and so forth, are called “ marks ”; the fathoms not indicated are called “deeps.” They run as follows:—
Fathom Deeps
1	.	.	.	.
4	.	.	.	.
6	.	.	.	.
8	.	.	.	.
9	.	.	.	.
n	.	.	.	.
12	... .
14	... .
16	.
18	... .
19	... .
Fathom Marks. >
2	Leather, with two ends.
3	Leather, with three ends.
5	White calico.
7	Red bunting.
10	Leather, with a hole in it,
13	Blue serge.
15	White calico.
17	Red bunting.
20	Strand, with two knots in it.
Calico, bunting and serge are preferred as distinctive marks, because a man can tell the difference in the dark by the feel
Heaving the line requires some practice, and is one of the most picturesque incidents of the life aboard a sailing-ship. The " leadsman,” as he is called, stands in the chains to windward.* Here he leans forward over the sea, being held safe by a band around his breast. In one hand he holds the coil of line, with the other he swings the lead first backwards and forwards, then round his head, and then forward as far as he can into the water. The reason of throwing it forward is to give it time to sink to the bottom before the ship, which is under way, comes up to tho place where the lead sank, when the line will be upright and will give the exact depth. The leadsman then, feeling the lead touch bottom, and seeing in a moment by the bits of coloured rag or leather what the depth is, calls out with a deep and and peculiar note, “ By the deep eight,” “ By the mark five,” and so forth. If the depth is a little more than the “ mark ’’ or the “ deep ” which he has to judge, he adds, “ And a quarter eight,” or whatever the figure may be. If less, then “ Quarter less six,” “ Quarter less eight,” as it may happen.
The. Deep-Sea, or Dipsey, Lead.—This is from 100 to 200 fathoms long,
* The “chains,” or more properly speaking the channels, are platforms or ledges projectin’ outside the ship to giro a great spread to tho lower rigging. Tho dead-eyes of the shrouds are attached to them.
Digitized by Tooele
THE DEEP SEA LEAD. 067
with a lead weighing perhaps as much as 30 lbs., and “ armed ” just like the lead of a hand line. It is marked just like a hand line up to 20 fathoms, then a strand with three knots indicates 30 fathoms, four knots 40 fathoms, and so on, the intermediate lives being marked by small strands with a single knot.
In sounding with the deep-sea lead the vessel must be hove to, as the sinker will take some time to reach the bottom. For instance, if you attach a sinker of 96 lbs. weight to a deep-sea line, and drop it in 900 fathoms— that is, just over a mile in depth—the time it will take to reach the bottom is just 27 minutes.
The vessel's way being stopped, one man carries the lead to the bows with a coil of the line, and others are ranged along the side, each holding another coil of it When all is ready, the order is given to “ Heave! ” The leadsman then heaves overboard, singing out, “ Watch there, watch 1" as a warning to the next man to look out; and as each man tending the line feels it tauten, he flings his eoil overboard, passing on the word, “ Watch there, watch! ” When the lead strikes bottom, the officer marks the indication ; the line is then hauled in, and, after the “ arming ” has been examined, is coiled away ready for immediate use.
To heave the lead properly requires practice and nerve; and the sensitiveness with which a man, by a forefinger laid on the line, can feel when the lead takes ground half a mile or a mile below him is only to be acquired early in life. “ There is always,” says Mr. Russell, “ a degree of excitement in this heaving of the deep-sea lead. You get a cast in coming into soundings and lively is the general joy among a ship’s company who have been many months away from home when the hoarse, peculiar cry of ‘Watch ho! watch,’ terminates in the lead striking English ground.”
This is the old method of taking deep-sea soundings, and it is cumbrous enough. Soundings nowadays can be taken by many patent machines, such as Massey's, Walker’s, or Sir William Thomson’s. But so conservative is the ordinary mariner and so deep is his distrust of automatic inventions that it may be doubted if he will ever bo happy without his world-old dipsey line.
In his “Voyage to the Capo,” Mr. Russell graphically depicts the emotions of an old-fashioned sailor on seeing how the depth of the sea was taken by Sir William Thomson’s sounding machine from a steamer flying along at full speed. “ Off Cape Blanco I was provided with an illustration of one of the strongest contrasts in respect to the transformation that has been wrought at sea that I have heretofore encountered. This came in the shape of the heaving of the lead. . . . When one talks of taking a cast of the lead, the mind docs not readily accommodate itself to the notion of finding bottom from a vessel storming along at a pace that gives her a run of over 300 miles in twenty-four hours. Soundings are now had from the deck of a steamer whether travelling at thirteen or at twenty miles
Digitized by LxOOQle
668
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
COMPASS CARD.
an hour; and they could be obtained, I dare say, if she could be made to steam at fifty miles an hour. It was the first time, indeed, that I had ever seen Sir William Thomson’s sounding machine used, and I watched the action of the beautiful invention with the deepest interest and admiration. We were off Cape Blanco, and where the lead was hove the chart showed a depth of 36 fathoms. There is a drum fixed well aft, fitted with a break cord, and wound around this drum are 300 fathoms of exceedingly fine, but extraordinarily strong,
wire. At the extremity of this wire there is fastened a very heavy iron sinker, ' armed ’ as the old-fashioned deep-sea lead is—that is to say, furnished with a lump of sticky substance for showing the character of the bottom. At a short distance from the sinker there is attached to the wire a copper tube containing a hermetically-sealed glass tube, filled with a chemical liquid upon which the salt acts. When the tube is hauled up the glass is taken out of it, and the extent of the discoloration of the liquid is measured by a graduated boxwood scale, which indicates, by marking the extent of the change in the colour of the chemical, the exact depth of the sea at the place where the lead is hove.
“I do ■ not know whether I am correctly describing this very remarkable invention, nor whether my words are at all successful in giving an idea of the nature of it to the reader. I am writing from memory only. But, as I have said, of all the contrasts I found between the old and the new life
in the fine steamer in which I was journeying to the Cape of Good Hope as a passenger, nothing impressed me more forcibly than the exact measurement of the depth of the sea, snatched with mathematical accuracy from a surface over which we were being driven at a velocity of between 13 and
14 knots an hour. The mariner, indeed, owes a large debt of gratitude to Sir William Thomson.”
III	.—The Mariner’s Compass.
Besides a chart and a lead-line, we shall want a Compaq for the navigation of our ship. A chart is of no use unless we know where is north and where is south; and in dull weather, when neither sun nor stars are visible, it will be quite impossible to determine this without a compass. In short, when out of sight of land, the mariner’s
SHIPPS COXPASS.
Digitized by
Google
THE MARINER’S COMPASS.
669
compass is the only instrument that shows the direction in which a ship is moving.
The Chinese have used the magnet from time immemorial; and it was also used by Japanese and Indian navigators many ages before it was
known in Europe. The the Carthaginians it is difficult to see how they managed their long voyages—how, for instance, they circumnavigated Africa under Hanno — without some such contrivance. By the twelfth century it became pretty widely known in Europe; and in 1242 the method of magnetising the needle was described by Baidak. When magnetised, the needle was stuck in a piece of wood or cork, or thrust into a cornstalk, and then put to float on the water for the purpose of giving direction. Nobody knows who actually invented the compass as a nautical instrument, though the credit is usually given to one Flavio Gioga, an Italian,
Greeks and Romans knew nothing of its use. Of
difficult to speak
with certainty; though it is
BINNACLE AND COMPAQ.
circa 1300; but probably he was no more than an improver of methods already existing. The French claim the invention, but on no better grounds than that the north point on the compass-card is always marked with a fleur-de-lis.
Briefly speaking, the compass is an instrument containing a magnetic needle which constantly points in a northerly direction.
Affixed to this needle, and underneath it, is a circular card, marked around its circumference with the thirty-two points of the compass.
This card in a ship’s compass, by means of what are called the gimbals, is always kept perfectly horizontal or steady, no matter how much the ship
Digitized by GOOQle
670
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
may roll or pitch; and the needle, too, is always level and pointing towards the north.
Of the thirty-two points of the compass there are four cardinal points, at right angles to each other—North, South, East, and West
By halving each of the four quarters, or right angles, we get four more points: the N.E. (north-east) point midway between N. and E.; and so on with S.E (south-east), $.W. (south-west), and N.W. (north-west); all midway between cardinal points. So far wc have eight principal points, and our card is marked off into eight Au/y-right angles. The minor points are obtained by still further dividing up these angles, until we get thirty-two points in all — eight points from north to east, eight points from east (o south, and so> on.
Taking the eight points from north to east we have, after N.: N. by E; N.N.E ; N.E. by N.; N.E ; N.E. by E.; EN.E.; E. by; N.; East; and so on with the other three divisions
The brass stand that contains the compass is called the binnacle, and is made sometimes of wood, but more usually of brass. Within it are supports (bearing'), on which rest the gimbals of the compass bowl. Both compass and binnacle have glass covers, which, while protecting the card from wind and rain, admit of its indications being distinctly seen. The binnacle is also furnished with a lamp, or two lamps, to cast a light on the com pass-card by night.
Moreover, inside the binnacle, and close to tho compass-card, is a small vertical black line, which is exactly in the line of the keel of the ship. This small black lino is called the “lubber’s point.” If, then, the man at the wheel is told to keep her S.W. by S., he turns his wheel to port or starboard, until he gets the S.W. by S. point exactly to the “ lubber’s point.” The ship will then be heading SAV. by S., and this is said to be her "course by compass.”
. In a large ship the helmsman is given his course, as it is ■ termed; that is, he is told to keep her S. by W., or whatever it may be, and all he has to do is to keep the S. by W. point on the compass-card to the little black line. It is no business of his to trouble about where the ship is going to; and, as a matter of fact, from tho wheel-house of a large ship it is not possible to sec the bows at all He simply steers with his eye on tho compass.
We have said that the needle of a compass points in a northerly direction. We did not say that it pointed to the- north, for, as a matter of fact, in a great many parts of the world it points not quite to the north. Suppose you are off Greenhithe on the Thames, and are looking at the Pole Star (which shows the true north very nearly). If you note its position by the compass, you will find it bear a little northward of N.N.E. (about N. 19° E). This is called the “Variation of the Compass.” And this variation differs in different places. On all charts, therefore, a compass is drawn on different parts of the chart,
Digitized by LnOOQle
VARIATION OF THE COMPASS.
671
showing the variation at that particular place, and this variation has to be allowed for.
Tinis, suppose a ship to be at a place where the variation is set down on the chart as 19’ East; what the ship’s compass will show as north will really be almost N.N.E. On the other hand, if the variation were 19’ West, the north point of the compass would really mean N.N.W. And these variations must be known and carefully allowed for in steering a ship.
At Greenwich, at the present moment, the variation is about 19’ West; so that the magnetic needle there docs not point to the north, but very nearly to N.N.W. In the West Indies the variation is nothing at all. At Cape Horn it is about 23’ East.
Of course, the reason of the variation is that the compass needle points, not to the tnie, but to the magnetic pole; and the true and magnetic poles do not occupy the same place. But the curious thing is—and nobody yet knows why it should be—that the variation keeps increasing a little every year, until it gets to its greatest; and then, year by year, it as gradually decreases. Scientific men believe that the magnetic pole is slowly moving round the geographical pole, and actually changing its position in longitude every year. But this is only a very probable theory.
In the year 1580, when the variation of the needle was first distinctly ascertained in London by Robert Norman and Stephen Burrowcs, it was found that^he magnetic needle pointed as much as 11° 15' East of North; and in a few years from that time it was discovered that the angle of variation was slowly diminishing. In the year 1657 the needle at London appeared to point to the true north; and from that time to the year 1819 it continued to move towards the west. In 1819, at Greenwich, the westerly variation was about 24’ 18', which was probably its maximum, for it has now diminished to 20°, and keeps on diminishing a little every year. No easterly variation equal in quantity to the westerly maximum has been observed with care, so we are left to conjecture on this point. But as the variation was 0 in 1657, and 24’ 18' in 1819, it may bo expected to be 0 again in the year 1980, and perhaps to obtain its greatest easterly value in a.d. 2141.
From variation we now turn to consider the deviation.
Everybody knows that if iron is brought close to a magnet, the two como together, as if with a slight force, showing attraction; and iron in any position, if near a compass, will affect it to a certain extent. Therefore in these days, when ships are built entirely of iron, or have a great deal of iron in their construction, the compasses they cany are bound to be seriously affected. This local attraction is often enough to cause very considerable errors; and these errors are what is meant when we talk of the "Deviation of the Compass.”
On modern ships, where the compasses are apt to be affected by the metal,
Digitized by LnOOQle
672
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
there is always a special compass rigged up on the top of a short kind of mast, as high up from the deck as possible, with a ladder up to it. This is arranged so as to diminish as far as possible the local deviation; and this compass is called the ship’s " Standard Compass.” The officers of the ship will often mount this ladder and compare this standard compass with the compass in the binnacle or elsewhere, and note if there is any difference between them.
All manner of iron things on board a ship may affect the needle—her guns.
THE COTE or CORK, OCEBNSTOWN HASBOVR.
F*<Ke. Vlty A Co.. Cork.
for instance, or her engines, or her funnel. In steamships that have telescopic funnels, the deviation of the standard coinpass may be affected to quite a large extent according as the funnel is up or down. Thus H.M.S. Blenheim, (a first-class protected cruiser), when her head was pointed east, used to have 9° deviation with her funnel up, and 15 $" with it down.
In the old days, when ships were built entirely of wood, the effect of iron on the compasses was not much heeded. Yet there is no doubt that many a fine vessel has been led to destruction before now by the magnetism of her own guns. Errors of the compass, in the time of the great French war, were repeatedly observed and wondered at Sometimes two or three men-of-war
Digitized by
Google
DEVIATION OF THE COMPASS.
673
would be escorting a convoy. At sunset a general signal would be made tc steer a given course during the night. The signal would be repeated by all the men-of-war, and answered by all the merchantmen, in token that they understood. Day broke, and discovered the convoy scattered all over the sea as far as eye could reach. Promptly the naval officer in charge would curse all the merchant captains, and yet the chances are that compasses were at the bottom of it, and that his own ship, with her tiers of guns, was the real delinquent.
It was defective compasses that, on December 24th, 1811, wrecked the two great battleships. Hart) and Defence (both 74’s), the one off the coast of
K M.S HLEXMELV.
Jutland, the other on the Haak Sand, Texel. Of the two crews, 587 people were drowned out of 593 on board the Defence, and every man of the 590 on board the Hero. Defective compasses, again, accounted for the Reliance, East Indiaman, wrecked on the French coast in 1842, with the loss of 109 lives; and defective compasses are supposed to have misled the unhappy Serpent, wrecked on the Spanish coast in 1889. The tragedy of the Apollo frigate, lost in the year 1804, may be told at length.
The Apollo, Captain Dixon, a frigate of thirty-six guns, was nearly a new vessel. On Monday, the 26th of March, 1804, she left the Cove of Cork, in company with H.M.S. Car^fort, to convoy sixty-nine sail of merchantmen to the West Indies.
On Sunday, the 1st of April, by an observation at noon, they were in 43
Digitized by LnOOQle
674 ■
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
latitude 40° 50' North, longitude by their account 12" 29' West: in other words, they imagined themselves to be about a hundred miles to the westward of the eoast of Portugal; and, therefore, though towards evening the wind began to blow hard from the south-west, they felt no anxiety, since they thought they had plenty of sea-room. At 10 o'clock that evening they hauled up the main-•sail and set the main-staysail, but a quarter of an hour afterwards the sheets gave way and the main-staysails split. At half-past ten they took in the foretopsail and set tho foresail. An hour later the main-topsail split, when they furled it, as well as the mainsail. The ship was now under foresail, main and mizzen storm-staysails, with the wind blowing hard and a heavy sea running. The Carysfort was not far off, and all the merchantmen were keeping pretty close to the two mcn-of-war, relying on them to lead the way.
To the utter confusion of everyone on board the Apollo, at about half-past three in the morning, the ship struck the ground violently, and by their reckoning the officers conjectured it must be upon some unknown shoal.
The ship continued to strike the ground heavily for several minutes, by which time her bottom was considerably damaged, as was proved by the water rising in the hold. The chain-pumps were rigged at once, and the men set to work to pump; but in about ten minutes the frigate beat and drove over the shoal, and got into deeper water.
On trying to steer her, however, they found that the rudder had been carried away. They therefore got before the wind, and the men were kept labouring at the pumps; but from the quantity of water in her there seemed every probability that sho would founder fast.
After running about five minutes she struck the ground again with a tremendous shock, and continued to strike and drive further on the sands, the sea at the same time making complete breaches over her. Her men at once cut away the main and mizzen rigging, upon which the masts crashed over on the port side, and the foremast went directly after. The wreck then fell on her port side, with the gunwale under water. Her quarter-deck guns broke loose and fell overboard, tearing her bulwarks to splinters. Only four or five guns could be used, and these were at once fired to alarm the convoy. But tho notice was already too late, for half of the merchantmen were already ashore themselves.
The Apollo continued to beat violently on the ground. Those of her crew who had hitherto remained below now found themselves every instant in danger of having their limbs broken by the starting bulkheads and by the sea-chests which were now afloat and dashing from side to side of the cabins. But it was only with the greatest difficulty that they reached the deck, after having been several times washed down the hatchway by the immense volumes of water incessantly pouring through it Gaining the deck at last, they held tight by the port bulwark of the quarter-deck and in the main chains. The captain stood, naked, upon the cabin skylight grating, holding
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE STORY OF THE APOL/.O FRIGATE.
675
on by the stump of the mizzen-mast, and doing his utmost to encourage both officers and men. Most of these were entirely naked, not having had time even to slip on a pair of trousers.
Day broke at about half-past four, and discovered the Portuguese coast at a distance of about two cables length, or 500 yards: a long sandy Lerch extending to Cape Mond ego, about three leagues to the southward. The wind still blew very hard, with a great swell of sea running. And, as daylight spread and the weather cleared a little, they could distinguish between twenty and thirty of the convoy ashore, some to north and some to south of them, and several of them complete wrecks.
About eight o’clock, as there appeared every likelihood of the ship going to pieces, and as the after-part was the lowest in the water, Captain Dixon ordered every person forward. The boatswain had his thigh broken in endeavouring to get one of the boats over the side; and of six fine boats not one was saved, all being staved and washed over with the booms. With great difficulty the people managed to pick their way forward through the wreckage that strewed the frigate's waist, and they were hardly gathered in the fore-part before she broke right in two at the gangways. The crew were, therefore, obliged to stow themselves in the four channels, and thence to the bowsprit end, to the number of 220; for out of the 240 persons who were on board when she struck it was supposed that twenty had been either washed overboard or had perished between decks.
Many of the men now tried to swim ashore. Tire gunner was the first person who attempted it, but he was drowned; he was followed by one of the lieutenants, the surgeon, surgeon’s mate, and several men, who shared the same fate in the enormous surf. About forty persons, however, had the good fortune to reach the shore, among whom were Lieutenant Harvey and Mr. Clallam, master’s mate.
The gale continued ail this day and through the night, when the situation of those left on board the Apollo became, truly horrible, many of tho older men and boys perishing through hunger (for in less than an hour after the Apollo took ground all her provisions were under water) and constant exposure to wet and cold.
The prospect on Tuesday inoming was even more hopeless, for the wind had increased and the surf was worse than ever. About noon the men’s spirits revived a little, as they saw Lieutenant Harvey and Mr. Callam hoisting ■out a boat from one of the merchant ships to come to their assistance. But, although they made several attempts to launch her through the surf, and although nearly a hundred men of the merchant sailors and Portuguese peasants stood by to help them, the boat—which was a heavy one—could not be got through the surf. Disappointed in this, some of the crew now endeavoured to get ashore on rafts constructed of pieces of the wreck; but the current set outwards instead of towards the shore, and they were carried away to
Digitized by Goode
676 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
sea and never seen or heal'd of again. One of these unfortunates was the captain, who, about throe o’clock in the afternoon-—his head, perhaps, being turned with his sufferings—cried out, “My lads, I’ll save you all J" and, jumping on to the jibboo in, which was afloat, with three seamen clinging to it, tried to work his way to the shore. In a few seconds he lost hold of the spar and. drifted out to sea, the three seamen following him.
Tuesday night now drew in, the wind still increasing, with frequent showers of rain, while the sea poured over them about once in every two minutes, the water running from their heads down their bodies and keeping them continually wet. Their cries reached the ears of the people on shore, even above ’ the noise of the gale. Several poor wretches were suffocated from their crowding together in such narrow room, and for the want of something to moisten their mouths. Some drank salt water; others chewed leather and even scraps of lead to stay their agonies of hunger and thirst.
When day dawned they saw that indefatigable pair, Lieutenant Harvey and Mr. Callam, again endeavouring to launch the boat; but it was not until three o'clock in the afternoon that they succeeded. The weather by this time had moderated slightly, and all the crew remaining on the wreck were brought safe on shore, praising God for a happy deliverance from a shipwreck which has scarcely a parallel. The weak state of the survivors may be conceived when we consider that they had nothing to cat or drink from Sunday to Wednesday afternoon, and were continually exposed all that time, naked, to the fury of wind and wave. Some men -died soon after getting on shore, from imprudently drinking too great a quantity of the spirits offered them. All were in a very weak and exhausted state, the greater part being badly bruised and wounded. About forty sail of merchant-ships were wrecked at the same time on this dreadful beach. Some ships souk with all their crew, and almost every ship lost from two to twelve men each ; yet the situation of the remainder was not equal to that of the frigate's ship’s company, as the merchant-ships, drawing ' a less draught of water, were mostly driven close on the shore, and no person remained on board them after the first morning. The masters of the merchantships had tents upon the beach, and some provisions they had saved front the wrecks, which they very generously distributed, and gave every assistance to the Apollo's ship's company.
Fortunately for the remainder of the convoy, Captain Fanshawe, without signal, wore just as it grew dark, and, with all the ships who were near •enough to see and adopt her change of course, the Caryrfort arrived in safety at Barbadoes. Of the Apollo's crew, sixty-one officers and men were lost; but the number that perished from the merchant-vessels was comparatively insignificant, for the reason already given.
Such then was the tragedy of the Apollo, a tragedy entirely brought about, it is believed, by the defective compasses.
At last these errors of the needle attracted official attention. Inquiries
Digitized by LnOOQle
ENDEAVOURED TO GET ASHORE ON RAFTS" {p. 675'.
Digitized by LnOOQle
G78 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
were made, and it was found that in some ships the deviation was small; in others it was large enough to cause the loss of the ship, even during a short run; whilst in others again, from the position of some iron stanchion, or bolt, or bar, tho deviation might bo changed in an opposite direction; so that the-error in one vessel was no guide to its amount or direction in another. Obviously the only thing Co be done was to find out the amount of error in each ship; this being done, the local attraction can • be corrected in three-ways; (1) by determining a table of errors for each ship; (2) by a compass-card specially drawn or d idorted to suit the errors of the particular vessel; (3) by introducing new forces to compensate for the disturbance of the needle, or to counteract it.
But we have not yet done with tho different causes of deviation. There-remains, for instance, that curious phenomenon connected with tho compass, especially in iron ships, which is known as “ semi-circular deviation." In art iron ship, the hull and fittings of which consist partly of hard iron and partly of soft iron, magnetism (more or less intense) is developed by the process of hammering whilst she is on the stocks—in other words, the ship herself, while building, has become a magnet; and it will make all the difference in the world whether she has been built with her head to the north or to tho south. The deviation is called semi-circular because it is easterly in one semicircle, or half of the compass, and westerly in the other half, as the ship’s head moves round a complete circle.
Again, the deviations in iron vessels, or in composite vessels, will be affected by the heeling over of the ship. The further she heels over, and the more-metal she exposes, the greater the error will be.
And it follows from what we have already said that the deviation must be materially altered by the position of the ship’s head. We will suppose that the mass of iron, or whatever it may bo that is influencing the compass-needle, is exactly forward of the compass, in a line between the compass and the bows of the ship. Then, if the ship’s head is pointing N. the needle will also-be pointing N.; that is to say, the mass of iron and tho true magnetic pole will both be drawing the needle in the same direction, and so there will be-no deviation.
But now turn the ship’s head to the east; the disturbing mass of iron will thus be to the east of the compass. The needle will try to point north, but the mass of iron will try to drag it towards the cast, and in the result it will point somewhere between north and east, or will have what is called an easterly deviation.
All these deviations have to be taken into account And, therefore, every ship before she goes to sea has her compasses adjusted, those of ships of the Royal Navy being usually sent to Her Majesty’s ('empass Observatory at Deptford, where they are tested under the superintendence of Captain Creak.
The tests differ according to the size and importance of the compass.
Digitized by LoOOQle
THE COMPASS OBSERVATORY. 079
Boats’ compasses (for use in rowing boats, launches, etc.), where absolute accuracy is not essential, are tested in a room of the Superintendent’s Office. Hero there is no need to eschew iron; and, as a matter of fact, you will find an iron stove, with iron poker and shovel, in the room. The compass to bo tested is pl acet 1 upon a stone pedestal that passes through the floor of the room, and has its foundation on the ground beneath. The room is a small one, and very plainly fitted, its most notable furniture being the number of boats’ compasses, beautifully finished, in cases of copper and mahogany, that usually stand on the floor, waiting to be tested.
In the Superintendent’s room one finds a number of books of reference, instruments, charts, etc. Among the charts is one of very great interest, for it shows where vessels may be brought by uncorrectcd compasses. Thus one ship, steering for Pembroke, would have been led, bad sho followed a faulty com] >ass, to Pad stow; another steering up Channel for Dover would have run upon the Cast]nets; another, bound for the same place, would have found herself on the Needles.
Upstairs is a small museum containing elegant, but useless, devices of inventors, which, as the nautical phrase has it, are “all my eye and my elbow." Here, too, arc a few early compasses, including the first watercompass made by a Feversham optician; and outside, in the passage, a number of compasses which have been on Polar expeditions, or round the world with the Challenge r.
Indeed, this office at Deptford—“ the Temple of Accuracy,” as Lord Kelvin once called it—may be said to be the world’s centre of magnetic knowledge. The Superintendent receives reports from every British war-ship in every corner of the world. Himself a gentleman of brilliant scientific attainments, he is in constant communication with the chief men of science in this country.
All compasses i.n which extreme accuracy is required are tested in another building, called the Compass Observatory. This stands in the grassy square of the Victualling Yard, in sight of the great San Josef's figure-head—forgotten trophy of the victory of Capo St Vincent It is an insignificant wooden structure, measuring, perhaps, fifteen feet in diameter, and dates back to 1843. Formerly it stood at Charlton, near Woolwich, whence Mr. Childers’ Administration removed it. No iron is allowed here—not even a penknife or a bunch of keys. An unregenerute contractor, who thought science all fudge, gave great trouble by hiding away a certain quantity of iron in the copper stove; and the apparatus made repeated journeys to and fro before all the offending metal could be got out of it. Within the room are three stone pillars in a line with a mark on a wall outside, and 110 feet away. The compass to be tested is placed on the first table, and its bearing ascertained by aligning sights upon this mark. On the second table is a telescopic sight, by which the movements of a very delicate magnet on the third table can be
Digitized by GOOQle
680 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
ascertained. The degrees of variation for Deptford (usually about 17°) ’can be read off on a scale and correction applied. *
The correction of a rnan-of-war’s compasses will last for three or four years. Then her compasses come back, and again undergo the testing process, when a note is made of any loss of magnetic power, of any deviations they may exhibit, whether they have lost or gained, or whether they are different in any way from what they were after their previous testing.
“ Now and then one is found to vary considerably; but, as a general rule, thirty minutes, or half a degree, is about the greatest loss that has been noted.”
But. it is not enough to test the compass ashore: its correctness must be tried on board; and for this purpose the ship must be “swung,” as it is called.
The great place in the Thames for swinging a ship is Greenhithe. The ship is taken out into the stream, her head is then pointed due north, and by means of warps she is gradually swung round so as to bring her head successively upon each of the thirty-two points of the compass. As she swings the magnetic bearing of some distant object (at Greenhithe a tower on Shooter's Hill is usually selected) is accurately taken with the standard compass—a separate bearing being taken and registered from each of the thirty-two points.
The standard compass is then taken ashore and set up in some place so as to bring the ship and the distant object in one line with the eye of the observer, and the bearings at each point—the real, correct bearings this time— are taken over again. The difference between this correct magnetic bearing and the bearing observed on board will be the amount of deviation of the ship's compass.
Deviation may also be corrected by a form of Water Compass. The compass-box is filled with spirits of wine and hermetically closed, with a stout glass plate for the top. The compass consists of two bar magnets, which cross each other at right angles, with the four arms surrounded by an attached hoop of steel, also magnetised. The whole is poised in the liquid, so that it rotates with perfect freedom.
Another method of finding out the deviation when a ship is being swung is by “reciprocal bearings.” In this case an accurate compass is set up on shore in some place where it may be seen from the standard compass on board. The ship's head is then pointed north, and the exact bearing of the compass ashore is taken by the ship’s compass. .
It must be understood that all this trouble is taken to provide a ship with a good standard coin pass only. Other compasses on board may have other deviations: so the ship’s course is given and all reckonings made by the standard compass alone, the compass in the binnacle being merely used as a guide for the helmsman.
We now come to the manner in which the Admiralty Standard Compass is made.
Digitized byVrOOQlC
THE ADMIRALTY STANDARD COMPASS.
681
As long ago as 1840, Airey, the Astronomer Royal, demonstrated that errors of the compass might he corrected by adjacent magnets and pieces of soft iron. This remedy was applied with partial success, the great drawback to which was the large size of the needle in the ordinary compass. To jneet this difficulty Sir William Thomson carried out a series of experiments for many years. He began by reducing the size of the needles, and at length, in 1878, produced a compass which was almost perfect and which was the basis of the Admiralty’s Standard Compass of the present day.
For a description of this standard compass we will quote Mr, Comewall-Jones's brief account in his “Ships, Sailors, and the Sea:”
“ The compass cards of the Admiralty Standard Compass are most carefully made. They are cemented to sheets of mica, and are printed with magnetic points after being fixed to the mica, in order to make sure that no error can arise from any shrinking of the cardboard. The cards themselves are much smaller than the compass cards of many of the compasses used in the mercantile marine. These large cards, although they can be read more accurately than the smaller cards of the Admiralty Standard Compass, are not so accurate in their performance.
“ In the Admiralty Standard Compass there arc four needles, each made of watch-spring steel, attached to the under side of the card. The needles are arranged in pairs. The innermost pair of needles are a fraction over 7 inches long (really 7 3 inches), the two outside needles are a little over 5 inches long (5 3 inches), and the weight of the whole card is 1525 grains.
“ The bowl containing the card is of stout copper. This has the effect of calming the vibrations of the needles, and guarding them as much as possible from outside attraction.
“ Two of the pivots for the card are pointed with iridium, or, as it is called, 1 native alloy,’ a material harder than steel and incapable of corrosion, which is found by the refiners when they smelt the platinum or silver from the Ural Mountains, or from the mines of Spain. The iridium comes to the workshop in the smallest of glass bottles, not larger round than a goose-quill and about an inch long, the little pieces of iridium being not much bigger than a pin’s head, and weighing each less than half a grain. Some of these are too soft, some are too spongy, and some too brittle, so that in the little bottle there may not be many pieces, after all, that are really fit for the purpose required. These iridium pivots work on ruby or agate cups, so that there shall be the least possible amount of friction.
“ The card is thus so nicely balanced that, in whatever position the ship may be, it will always be able to rotate freely.”
Digitized by Google
CHAPTER XXIX. navigation (eontinued).
Dead-reckoning—Tho Log—Heaving tho Log—Old Logs and New—Tho Nautical Mile—The Sextant —How to Find Latitude—And Longitude—Chaucer on tlio Astrolabe—Instruments of tho Ancient Mariners—Chronometci-s—Log-Hoard—Log-Book—The Barometer—Strength of the Wind—Weather-Wisdom and Weather-Lore—Clouds and what they Mean—How to Head the Barometer—Admiral Fitzroy's Khymes.
TITHE Mariner’s Compass, then, tells us in what direction our ship is going, We have still to find out her exact position, and the speed at which she is running.
In the days of the early navigators the answer to the former question (‘ Where is our ship?”) depended almost entirely on the answer given to the hitter (“How fast lias she been travelling ? ”). Their notions of latitude were of the vaguest. If they had any conception at all of longitude, they had no means of determining it; and so they were driven to depend upon what is. nowadays called Dead-reckoning. One Thomas Stecvens, who, in the year 1579, sent home to his father an account of his voyage to the East Indies, coinplains that it is hard to sail from west to east, or from east to west, because there is no fixed point in the sky whereby to direct a course. (No doubt Mr. Thomas Stee vens would have liked a pole star in each of the four corners of the heavens.) And he adds that not a bird appears, nor a sign in the air or in the sea, which has not been written about by those who make tho voyage. " Wherefore, partly by their own experience, and pondering withal what space the ship was aide to make with sack a whide, and such direction, and partly by the experience of others, whose books and navigations they have, they gesso whereabouts they be.”
This “ guessing,” as Steevens calls it, is no other than the dead-reckoning on which vessels must still rely in dull or hazy weather, when no observation can be taken of tho sun’s altitude.
Dead-reckoning simply consists in finding out how fast the ship sails by-heaving the log, entering the course sailed, and allowing for leeway. Our ship, let us say, steered due west for an hour, then for a couple of hours W. by S., then for another hour W.S.W. In these four hours her speed varied—
Digitized by
Google
THE LCG.
683
between noon and one o’clock, by the log, she was sailing at eight knots an hour; from one to three her speed was five and a half knots; between three and four it had dropped to four and a half knots; and her leeway varied from half a point to a point. From these entries on the log-slate the ship's place on the chart may be set down or “ pricked.” Of course, it is not perfectly accurate; but in thick weather there is no other way of getting at a ship’s position. The sun may be invisible for days, and all that a skipper can do is to heave his log and note how the ship heads, and what leeway she is. making. It was by such reckonings as these that the old mariners crossed the ocean, and somehow reached their destinations.
IV	.—The Log.
The Log is an instrument by which wo determine the speed at which a. ship is moving at a given time.
It is another striking instance of the conservatism of sailors that, although many patent logs have been invented, the old “reel-log”—said to be as old as the fifteenth century—has never been quite superseded, and the contrivance
in use to-day is very much the same as that used by Drake and Dampier and Cook.
The principle of the log is simply this:—You drop a floating the water, having first attached a line to it; you lot the ship run
Cavendish
object into away from
it for a certain time, paying out the line as she runs; at the end of that time you cheek the line, pull it on board, and measure it off.
The time allowed is usually twenty-eight seconds (sometimes it is fourteen seconds). Further proof of marine conservatism will be found in this, that the time is measured, not by a watch or clock, but by a hand-glass. Your line shows you how far the ship has run in these twenty-eight seconds.
The Loa consists of a log-xkip and a log-line. The log-ship is a piece of wood in the shape of a sector of a circle, with the arc weighted, and fitted1 with two lines to enable it to swim square and upright in the water, and is fastened to the end of the log-line. One of the lines is fitted with a peg to draw out.
Very often a conical-shaped canvas-bag is substituted for this piece of wood, the log-line being attached in much the same way.
On the log-ship being thrown overboard,’ it catches the water and remains stationary, and as the ship moves ahead away from it, the line is pulled off a reel. A sufficient quantity of stray line is tossed over to enable the log-ship to get proper hold of the water before the measurement begins ; and a piece of white bunting is placed to mark the end of the stray line, and the point where the measurement begins.
The line is measured off by a simple rulc-of-three sum. The length of each knot in the line must be the same part of a sea-mile ns the sand-glass is of an hour. The sand in your glass will run for twenty-eight seconds. You ask
Digitized by Google
684
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
yourself, “If a ship will sail or steam over 2,027 yards, or one nautical mile, in one hour, how many yards will she pass over in twenty-eight seconds?” It works out thus:
hour 1 or 3,600 see.
seconds
28
28
2H x 2,027
3,lilM
14,189
900
mile
1	:
2,027 yards ;
15'7 yards.
length of line.
Having found your answer, you measure the line off to it into spaces called “knots.” At the first knot you fasten a piece of leather; at the second knot a piece of leather with two tails, and so on.
walker's PATENT “cHBBUll” SHIF-LOC WITH ROTATOR AND MO-tTXZ.
To Heave the Loy.—One seaman stands by with the reel, another takes the log-glass, which must be first ascertained to bo clear, and an officer of the watch takes the logship and asks, "All clear?" On receiving the reply, “All clear; ” he throws the log-ship well out to leeward from the lee quarter, with sufficient stray line to let. it fall clear into the water; then, as the piece of white bunting at the end of this stray line passes over the Quarter, he calls “ Turn ’ ” The seaman turns the glass, and the line runs oft the reel while the sand runs. The instant the glass is out, the man who holds out cries “ Stop ■ ” The officer then checks the line, and notes the exact distance by looking at the nearest mark ; and the lino is then reeled up, the peg being dragged out of the log-ship by a jerk, which enables the men to haul in the line with comparative case.
But although this, the old reel-log, has never been quite superseded, and perhaps never will be, the Patent Loy is now used to a great extent, especially by steamers. This instrument, consisting of a rotator and a register, is kept
Digitized by
Google
OLD LOUS AND NEW.
685
towing overboard from the weather-quarter, the line used being sufficiently long to take the line clear of the eddy in the wake of the ship. The mechanism is much the same in principle as that of a screw-propeller. As the ship tows
HEAVING THE LOO.
the log, the rotator, or fan, revolves more or less rapidly, according to the rate at which it is drawn through the water; and its revolutions set in motion a system of wheel-work which turns the hands of three indices on the register.
By a recent improvement in its mechanism, the rotator alone is towed astern, and the register is connected with it from on board, so that without any hauling in the distance run can be told at any moment The best of all
Digitized by^OOQlC
686
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
these logs is Walker’s Patent “ Cherub,” which is now almost exclusively used in the Navy. Next after this, perhaps, comes the old "Harpoon" log, invented in 1865; and the logs of each have peculiarities of their own—some ship* masters preferring one maker's instruments, and some another’s.
"Seamen,” says Mr. Russell, “have told me that with their eye they can tell tho speed of their ship more accurately than with the log-line. I do not believe this, and, on testing these cocksure men, I have never once found them right within half a knot. Of course, this refers to sailing ships. A steamer goes along steadily, and it is quite conceivable that a person accustomed to steamships could tell correctly tho speed of one by looking over the side. But a sailing vessel varies her rate with every puff. Under ■certain conditions the increased sail that seems to be thrashing her through ' it with greater velocity has diminished her speed. I particularly recollect tin instance. A dynamometer was attached to the taffrail of a large full-rigged ship; to it was affixed a line which it dragged through the water. Tho pull of the line -	was equivalent to a weight of
——	sixty pounds. The vessel was
"	then sailing with tho wind a
—■_______________ point before the beam, under all
,B	plain sail, the breeze fresh. Tho
log ship.	fore-topmast studding-sail was
ci Peg. & Lead.	r
set, and the hand of the dynamometer went back, showing that the speed had been decreased to the ■extent illustrated by this diminution of weight in the pull of the line by the setting of the studding-sail. The chief officer, however, was so certain that the ship had improved her speed, despite the unmistakable indications ■of the dynamometer, that, to prove his judgment, he ordered the log to be hove, with the result that the speed was less by a knot (I think) than it had been before the studding-sail was set. The fact is, the ship had sail ■enough; the additional canvas simply buried, and so retarded her. Yet this same mate was one of many seamen who had assured me that they -could tell the speed of a vessel better with the eye than with the log.”
Mr. Russell quotes, however, from an old book of “ Voyages to the East Indies, by the late John Splinter Stavorinus,” tn 1768-71-74 and '75, to show that Dutchmen, at any rate, used to choose the eye in preference to the knotted-linc. Stavorinus says that tho Dutchmen of his time were content to steer within a quarter of a point, without aiming at greater exactness.” Also they hove no log. They just took a guess at leeway, and, as for their speed, they computed it in the following easy-going way:—They began by measuring a distance of forty feet along the ship's side; they then “ take notice of any remarkable patch of froth when it is abreast of the foremost
Digitized by LnOOQle
THE SEXTANT.
687
end of the measured distance, and count half-seconds till the mark of froth is abreast of the after end. With the number of half-seconds thus obtained they divide the number 48, taking the product for the rate of sailing in geographical miles in one hour, or the number of Dutch miles in four hours.” They were almost as careless in taking observations of tho sun; and ‘'from all this,” adds Stavorinus drily, " it is not difficult to conceive the reason why the Dutch arc frequently about ten degrees out in their reckoning.”
The Nautical Mile..—In navigation, distance is always measured in nautical, or sea, miles. There are 1,760 yards in a land mile, and 2,027 in a sea mile, or “ knot,” as it is usually called.
The reason is simple. A land mile is measured without any reference to tho size of the earth. A sea mile is the number of yards contained in the circumference of the earth at the quarter, divided by 21,600 (360° x 60), the number of minutes in a circle, or the sixtieth part of a degree on the equator. ,
V.—The Sextant.
We have found the direction in which our ship is moving, the speed at which she is moving, and the depth of water over which she is moving. It remains to find her position, and if she be out of sight of land this can only be ascertained by a scientific process, called “Taking an Observation”— that is to say, we must find out the ship’s latitude and longitude.
Now it is obvious that if it can be found out that an object is somewhere on a vertical line, and at the same time on a particular horizontal line that crosses the vertical line at right angles, there is only one possible place where it can be, namely, at the exact point where the two lines cross each other.
On a Mercator’s Chart these vertical lines are lines of longitude, and the horizontal lines are lines of latitude. As everybody knows, latitude is the distance north and south of the equator; and longitude is the distance cast or west of any fixed meridian, the meridian used by Englishmen being an imaginary line passing from the north to the south pole through Greenwich.
Suppose, for instance, a captain crossing the Atlantic finds out that he is in latitude 39’ N. This is a very valuable piece of information; but if he knows this and nothing more, he may be anywhere on the ocean between Lisbon and Philadelphia, If, however, by another observation he could find out that he was in longitude 32° W., then he would know at once that he was close to the island of Flores, in the Azores, because he is somewhere in latitude 39° N„ and longitude 32° W., and there is only one possible place common to the two lines.
The question is, How are we to find out this latitude and longitude ?
1.	Latitude.—The best and simplest method of finding the latitude of a ship nt sea is from an observed altitude of the sun or of a fixed star when on the 'meridian.
Digitized by LnOOQle
688
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
Naturally the sun is oftener used for this purpose than a star; so we will take the sun We shall have to use three words which we may as well define at once :—
Zenith is that point in the horizon which is right over the observer's head; the very keystone of the heavens, in fact.
Meridian Altitude.—You are standing on an imaginary line drawn from the north to south poles. The sun passing from east to west crosses this line; and whenever it crosses it will be noonday with you. In other words, when, the sun. is approaching your meridian it gets higher and higher, and after it has passed it sinks lower and lower. The greatest altitude it attains is the meridian altitude.
But except at the equator the sun
never passes right over your head (or
HEX TANT.
across the zenith), but a little to north or south. The difference between the meridian, altitude and the zenith is called the “ zenith, distance."
Declination.—This is the distance of the sun, or any other celestial object, from the celestial equator. In fact, declination in the heavens corresponds to latitude in the globe. The sun's declination for each day is calculated by astronomers and published in the Nautical Almanac.
To find your latitude, then, you first take the sun’s meridian altitude. You then subtract
this from the altitude of the zenith, which, of course, will be 90’. This gives you the zenith distance, which must be named N. or S., according as the zenith is north or south of the .sun. Now find the sun's declination
from the Nautical Almanac and write it underneath the zenith distance, marking this, too, N. or S., as the case may be.
If they are both N. or both S. add them together; if one is N. and the other S. subtract: result in each case will be the latitude,
The instrument usually employed for taking the height of the sun at sea in order to obtain the latitude, is the Sextant, a beautiful instrument by means of which the angle can be measured between any two well-defined objects, in whatever direction they may be placed ;. another merit being that it requires no more steadiness than is necessary for seeing the object distinctly.
But the Sextant has been evolved from a very rude beginning. Early mariners had no better means of obtaining their latitude than the cross-staff', or fore-staff. This was a big wooden staff, marked with a scale of degrees and parts of degrees. Upon this were fitted cross-pieces, which slid along it, and the sun’s height was taken by the length of the shadow which the cross-piece threw on the staff' when the instrument was adjusted.
Digitized by
Google
TAKINO THE SUN.
44
Digitized by GOOQle
G30
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
There was also the Astrolabe, upon which no less a man than the poet Chaucer wrote a treatise in the year 1391. He dedicated it to his son. “ Litcll Lowis, my sone, I have perceived wel by certeyne evidences thyn abilite to lento sciencez touehinge noumbres and proporciouns; and as wel considers I thy bisy preycre in special to lerne tho Tretis of the Astrolabie. Than, for as mechel as a philosofre seith, 'ho wrappeth him in his frend, that condescends th to the rightful preyers of his frend,’ the-for have I geven thee a suftisaunt Astrolabie as for cure orizonte, compowned after the latitude of Oxen ford.” He is careful to say that he will give only sonic of the conclusions to be obtained by the instrument—for three reasons: (1) because some of them are unknown in this land; (2) because some are uncertain; and (3) some " arc too hard to thy tender year to conceive.” As it was, “ Little Lewis ” must have had a tough job to wrestle with some of the explanations. Here, for instance, is a “ Conclusioun to prove the latitude of a regioun: ”—
“Understood wel that tho latitude of any place in a regioun is verreyly the space by-twixt the senith of hem that dwellen there and the equinoxial cerkle, north or southe, taking the mesure in the meridional lyne, as sheweth in the ahnikantcras of thyn Astrolabie. And thilke space is as moche as the pool artik is hey in the same place fro the orisonte. And than is the depres-sioum of the pol antartik, that is to seyne, than is the pol antartik by-nethe the orisonte, the same quantitc of space, neither more ne lasse. Thanne, yif thow desire to knowe this latitude of the regioun, tak the altitude of the sonnc in the middel of the day, whan the sonne is in the hevedes of Aries or of Libra; (for thanne moeveth the sonne in the lyne equinoxial); and abate the nombre of that same sonnes altitude out of 90, and thenne is the remcnaunt of the noumbre that levcth the latitude of the regioun. As thus: I suppose that the sonne is thilke 'day at noon 38 degrees and 10 minutes of hoyghte. Abate thanne thise degrees and minutes out of 90; so love th them 51 degrees and 50 minutes, the latitude. I scy not this but for ensample; for wel I wot the latitude of Oxenforde is certein minutes lasse, as I mighte prove. Now yif so be that thee someth, to long a taryinge, to abyde til that the sonne be in the hevedes of Aries or of Libra, thanne waite whan the sonnc js in any other degree of the Zodiak, and considers the degree of his declinacion fro the equinoxial lyne; and yif it bo so that the sonnes declinacion be northward fro the equinoxial, abate thanne fro the sonnes altitude at noon the nombre of his declinacion, and thanne has tow the heyghte of the hevedes of Aries and Libra. As thus; my sonne is, par aventure, in the firste degre of Leoun, 58 degrees and 10 minutes of heyghte at noon and is deelinacion is almost 20 degrees northward fro the equinoxial; abate thanne thilke 20 degree of deelinacion out of the altutudo at noon, than leveth thee 38 degrees and odde minutes; lo ther the heved of Aries and Libra, and thyn equinoxial in that regioun.”
All that, the ancient mariner had to do, therefore, was to take the height
Digitized by LnOOQle
BOW TO FIND A SHIP'S POSITION. 61)1
of the sun, subtract or add the declination, and take the result as his latitude. “ An easy process,” says Mr. Russell, “ that gives us Cape Horn on the 52nd parallel and Valdivia on the 43rd!—that is, according to ono or two old maps that I have seen." And yet the ancient mariner managed to reach his port. To the Cross-staff and Astrolabe must be added tho Back-ctaff, invented by Davis, the Arctic explorer.
. Halley’s Quadrant was not invented until the year 1730. Tn a narrative of one Captain James’s “Strange and Dangerous Voyage in his Intended Discovery of the North-West Passage into the South Sea, in the Years 1631 and 1632” (“Churchill's Collection,” Vol. IL), we have a list of the instruments in use just a hundred years before Halley’s discovery. Captain James took with him a quadrant, of no less than four-foot semi-diameter, “ of old reasoned pear-tree wood, artificially made, and with al care possible divided into diagonals, even to minutes.” Further, he had an equilateral triangle of the same wood, “ whose radius was five-foot at least; ” a second quadrant with a two-foot semi-diameter; a staff for taking altitudes and distances (this was seven feet long); another staff', six feet long; a cross-staff; three Jacob’s staves; and two of “ Mr. Davis's back-staves.” Also, among what he calls “ horizontial instruments,” Captain James talks of two semicircles, “ two foot semi-diameter, of seasoned pear-tree wood;” six “meridian compasses;” four needles in square boxes; “ moreover, four special needles (which my good friends, Mr. Allen and Mr. Maire, gave me) of six inches diameter, and toucht curiously with the best loadstone in England ;” a loadstone with tho poles marked, for fear of a mistake; a watch-clock ; “ a table, every day calculated correspondent to the latitude, according to Mr. Gunter’s directions in his book, the letter to keep our time and our compass and judge of our course;1’ log-lines and glasses; “two pair of curious globes, made purposely ; and finally, “ I made a meridian line of 120 yards long, with six plumb lines hanging in it, some of them being above 30 feet high, and the weights hung in a holo in the ground, to avoid wind. And this to take the sun’s or moon’s coming to the meridian. This line we verified by setting it by the pole itself, and by many other ways.”
Into the construction of the Sextant, which has gradually superseded the Quadrant, we will not enter here, but must refer the reader to some scientific treatise on navigation. Next to tho coin pass, it is the most valuable of all a ship’s instruments.
2.	Lv™jitiule.—It was not Latitude, however, but Longitude that really made the ancient mariner tear his “Jong grey beard.”
Shortly speaking, your longitude will bo the difference between the mean time at Greenwich* and mean time at your ship. Now the sun’s altitude will give you the latter, and for the former you rely on the ship’s chronometer.
’ “ Mean time ” is the westerly hour anglo of the mean sun; and the mean sun is an imaginary sun conceived as moving uniformly on the equator, which the actual SUU docs not.
Digitized byVrOOQlC
692
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
A Chronometer is a time-keeper of very superior construction, keeping
Greenwich time as accurately as it is possible for any timepiece to keep: and. eveiy ship carries several in ease .of one going wrong.
But in the days before chronometers* and for some little time after-
wards, Longitude remained an unsolved problem. The astronomer Gellibrand, writing an appendix to that same “ Strange and Dangerous Voyage ” of Captain James of which we spoke just now, says, " The longitude of a meridian is that which hath and still wearicth the greatest masters of
"WsnrcK vr by the mate at moon” <;<• toll
geography.” He regards eclipses as the most satisfactory means of determining the longitude, more especially eclipses of the moon, “ whose leisure, however, we must often wait, and, perhaps, go without, if the heavens be not propitious to us.” 'Again, one Joshua Kelly, of “Broad Street, Wapping, near Wapping New Stairs,” who published in 1720 a “Compleat Modern Navigator’s Tutor, or The Whole Art of Navigation,” professes to teach “ five of the most rational ways ” of finding a ship’s longitude ; but very cautiously advises his readers “ not to oonfide too much in them, or to omit any of the methods of a sea journal or other precautions to preserve a ship when she
■ nears land.” He, too, is very great on the subject of eclipses as a means of finding longitude, and also recommends the observation of Jupiter’s satellites. Of the former he remarks
ingenuously, that “ it would be accurate and useful if we could have an eclipse
of the moon every night;” and of the latter, that “the impracticability of
managing a telescope twelve or fourteen feet long in the tossing, rolling motion of a ship at sea surrounds it with difficulties scarce to be remedy’d.”
But Kelly's chief craving—as Mr, Robert C. Leslie has shown in his edition of W oodes Rogers’s Journal f—was for some such good sea timekeeper as was
* Tho Chronometer was invented by John Harrison in 1762. It was followed by the scarcely less important. publication of the “ Nautical Almanac,” begun by Dr. Neville Maokelyne, the Astronomer Royal, in 1767.
f “ Life aboard a British Privateer in tho Time of Queen Anne.” By Robert C. Leslie. London: Chapman & Hall. 1994. ...
Digitized byVtOOQIC
DEVICES OF THE OLD NAVIGATORS.
693
afterwards found in the Chronometer. He desired, as he put it, “ automatas, or unerring clocks or watches”; and went so far as to give directions for “preparing and using a very perfect and true-running sand-glass, which may precisely run twenty-four hours without error, to be set exactly at noon on leaving the land; which glass, upon being run out, is to be turned instantly every day, not losing any time in the turning of it; and so having very warily kept the said glass ’til you think good to make an observation at noon, and having in readiness an half-hour, minute, and half-minute glass, you may thereby know exactly how much the twenty-four hour glass is
I'httUi Fouiluw, Lee. KenL
G KEEN WK H ORSEKVATOEY.
before or after the ship's time; the difference being your longitude, east or west, according as the time by the sun is afore or after the time by the glass.”
There never yet was a watch or clock made that kept absolutely perfect time; and even the modern chronometer is found to vary a little. Any error in the chronometer means an error in the calculations such as may conceivably lead to the loss of a ship; and, therefore, before a ship sails, all her chronometers are sent ashore to be “ rated,” as it is called—that is, they are carefully comparer! for some time with what is known to be absolutely correct time, and a note is taken how much they gain or lose. This rating is returned to the ship with the chronometers, and is allowed for in all calculations. Of course, so long as the exact amount of error is known and allowed for it does not matter whether the chronometer gains or loses half a second or more a day.
Digitized by LjOOQle
694
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
VI.—The Log-Board and Log-Book.
A Ship’s Reckoning, then, is that account by which we can know at any time where our ship is, and how she must steer to gain her port.
The basis of the reckoning is first kept on the Log-Board, and then transferred into the Log-Book.
The Log-Board is a slate in a folding frame, on which is written, at intervals during tho day, everything connected with tho progress of the ship on her voyage, as well as any occurrences worthy of note. The Log-Board is divided into seven columns as follows:—■
H. | K. | F. | Courses. | Winds. [ Leeway. | Remarks.
The first column, the twenty-four Hours from the noon of one day to the noon of the next, divided into two portions of twelve hours each.
In the second and third column are entered the Knots and Fathoms the ship is found to run per hour, set against the hours when the log was hove.
The fourth column contains tho Courses the ship steers.
The fifth column gives the direction of the IKinds.
The sixth column notes tho Leewag, when any has been made.
The seventh column, under .Remarks, gives the kind of wind and weather; state of the sea; alteration of sails; employment of crew; when the ship was pumped, and amount of water in the well; the ships sighted or spoken; if in soundings, the depth of water and the nature of the bottom, etc.; and any other remarks the officer of the watch may think it his duty to insert.
The Log-Book, headed on each page—“ Journal of the ship-----------------, bound from-------------------------------------------------------------------towards-,” is a book ruled like the Log-Boa rd, in order to contain the daily copies of everything written on the Log-Board by the officers of the watch as the things occurred. It is written up by the mate at noon, and is taken to be the only authentic record of tlie ship's doings.
VIL—The Barometer.
We have still to consider briefly the two very important subjects of JFind and Weather.
Winds have different names, not only from their direction, but from the force with which they blow. Thus wo may have a light breeze, a moderate breeze, a breeze, a fresh breeze, half a gale, a gale, and a hurricane.
As Mr. Cornewall-Jones puts it:—“With the wind, as with most other things, everything depends on the quantity one gets of it.” The same wind which in moderation carries the ship safely on her way, in excess sends her on shore and makes a wreck of her.
“A sensible current of air travels at about the rate of three feet in a second: a senile breeze at double that rate : a fresh breeze about sixteen feet in a second; a strong breeze thirty-two feet; a gale from sixty-four to eighty feet; and a hurricane, that uproots trees and blows down houses, at about 145 feet in a second, or 100 miles an hour.”
Digitized by
Google
WG-BOARD, BOOK, AND BAROMETER.
695
Thus in a moderate breeze the velocity of the wind will not exceed from eight to ten miles an hour; while in a hurricane it reaches ten times that S]Ked The pressure of the wind when travelling at 100 miles an hour will be equal to about 56 lbs. upon the square foot.
The amount of sail carried by a vessel in different winds will, of course, depend greatly on the strength and newness of her spars, sails, and rigging. But the following table may be taken as generally safe:—
Hourly Velocity iu Miles. *	Scale,	State.	Sail Carried. 0 ... Calm.
I .. 2	to 3 .. 4	to 7 .. 8	to 14 .. 15 to 18 .. 19 to 22 .. 23 to 28 .. 28 to 40 .. 40 to 48 .. 48 to 50 57 to 80 .. 80 to 100 ..	1	...	Light	Airs	...	SteerageWay. 2	...	Light	Breeze	...	Clean Full—1 to 2 knots. 3	...	Gentle Breeze	...	„	„	3 to 4 knots. 4	...	Moderate Breeze	...	„	„	5 to 6 knots. 5	...	Fresh Breeze	...	With royals. 0	...	Strong Breeze	...	Top-gallant sails over single reefs. 7	...	Moderate Gale	...	Two reefs in topsail. 8	...	Fresh	Gale	...	Three reefs in topsail 9	...	Strong Gale	...	Close-reefed topsails	and	courses. in	...	Whole Gale	...	Close-reefed topsails	and	reefed	foresail. It	...	Storm	...	Storm staysails. 12	...	Hurricane	...	Bare poles.
Weather.—One sometimes comes across an almanack that professes to tell what the weather will be, day by day, for the ensuing year. No satisfactory explanation has yet been discovered for the undoubted fact that the authors of. these publications are seldom or never right; but there are excellent reasons why they should usually be wrong. The fact is, roughly speaking, that nothing can possibly be known of the weather many hours in advance, at least, under the present conditions of meteorology. The only exception is the case of revolving storms. It is known for a fact that these storms in both hemispheres always revolve in a direction opposite to the apparent course of the sun. Therefore, in the northern hemisphere, where the sun appears to move from left to right, they revolve from right to left. Further, these storms have a progressive as well as a circular motion. In north latitudes within the tropics this motion is to the westward, on the edge of the tropics it is to the north ward, and in the temperate zone towards the north-east. So we often have notices from New York that a gale will probably visit tho British coasts on such and such a day, meaning that they have already got the storm oft’ the American coast, and, if its speed can be ascertained, the date of its arrival is only a matter of calculation. Of course, it may blow itself out in mid-Atlantic and never reach England at all; but the value of the warning is not lessened thereby.
On the whole, however, it may be said that nothing can possibly be known of the weather we are going to have next week. But of the weather we are going to have within tlie next few hours something may be known,
Digitized by LnOOQle
696
THE 8T0KY OF THE SEA.
and our knowledge in this case has a double basis: (1) our observation of the sky, winds, etc.; (2) our reading of the barometer.
An experienced sailor will find a hundred indications of coming weather in the sky itself.	For instance, a red sky at sunset presages tine weather;
a red sky in the morning bad weather.	A greenish sunset almost always
means rain or wind ; with a grey morning sky there is a good chance of a. tine day; a bright blue sky means tine weather; a dark indigo sky carries wind. A yellow sky at sunset is always to be distrusted : if pale yellow, it usually fore-	;^
“ OBJECTS AT SEA WILL * LOUM VP*” ( p. 659).
tells rain; if bright yellow, wind; and a deep orange means wind and rain together.
Some <>f these indications have been thrown into rhyme, as follows:—
“ A red sky in the morning,
■Sailors take warning ;
A red sky at night
Is a sailor’s delight.”
“ The evening red and morning grey
Arc sure signs of a fine day ;
But the evening grey and morning red
Make the sailor shake his head.”
Digitized by LnOOQle
C|MKL».	CrMlLfH.
TYPES OF CLOUDS.
Digitized by
Google
698
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
“ With the rain before the wind, Your topsail halyards you must mind ; But, when the wind’s before the lain, You may hoist your topsails up again.1
“ If clouds are gathering thick and fast, Look out sharp for sail and mast; But, if they lag upon the rpad, Keep your flying kites abroad.”
A rainbow off' the British coasts carries much the same warning as a red sky.
“ A rainbow in the morning
Is the sailor’s warning;
A rainbow at night
Is the sailor's delight”
—the reason being that in Great Britain and Ireland we get most of our rain from the west or south-west, so that a rainbow in the morning, when the sun is in the cast, means that rain is coming up from the west; whereas a rainbow in the evening, when the sun is in the west, is more likely to indicate that the rain has passed over.
Again, sometimes at sunset, as the sun sinks below the horizon, its face appears oval rather than round: this is due to refraction of the atmosphere, and foretells fine dry weather.
A halo around the sun is a sure sign of bad weather, and a halo around the moon is almost as bad. Another omen of tho moon is given in the tine old ballad of “ Sir Patrick Spens":—
“ * Mak’ ready, mak’ ready, my merry men a’ 1 Our gude ship sails the morn.’
1	Now, ever alake, my master dear, I fear a deadly storm.
‘I saw the new moon late yestreen
W? the auld moon in her arm;
And, if we gang to sea, master, I fear we’ll come to harm.’
“They hadna’ sailed a league, a league, A league but barely three, When the lift grew dark, and the wind blew loud, And gurly grew the sea.”
We have mentioned atmospheric refraction. The reason of it—the reason why we see things out of their proper shape—is that wc are looking at them through media of different density. The density of the atmosphere near the earth is subject to great irregularities, which cause some curious atmospherical phenomena, in which actual objects appear placed in the most fantastic and unreal positions. Extreme instances of this are the Fata
Digitized by
Google
WEATHER-OMENS.
699
Mvrg>mu and the Mirage; hut instances less striking arc common enough. Very often, in dry weather, when the atmosphere is dense and the barometer accordingly high, objects at sea will “loom up," as sailors put it. The masts of a distant ship will appear twice as high as they really arc, or the flagstaff on a neighbouring diff will stand up as if on a mountain top many thousands of feet in height. All these appearances foretell dry weather. For just the same reason distant lights after dark will look brighter and whiter during rainy weather or just before; while ‘a yellowish or a reddish tingemeaning that they are seen through a denser atmosphere—foretells tho approach of fine weather.
Clouds also have much to tell us. Generally speaking, if their edges appear soft and delicate (density of atmosphere again), the weather will be fine; if their edges are hardly and sharply defined, we may look out for squalls. There are seven distinct classes of clouds.
1.	Cirrus.—A cloud resembling a lock of hair or a feather. Sailors call Cirrus clouds “ mares’ tails.” These are the highest kind of clouds, being usually from three to five miles above the surface of the sea If the ends of “mares’ tails” run in the same direction as that in which the wind is blowing, the wind will remain steady; if they seem to be blown backwards, the wind is probably going to shift.
2.	Cumulus.—A cloud piled up in rounded heaps. The great masses of cloud that one secs heaped up like great snow-hills in a summer sky, are Cumulus clouds. When of moderate size and shape, and when they appear only during the heat, of the day, fine weather may be expected; but if they come rapidly together, and in great quantities, especially towards sunset, one may expect rain.
3.	Stratus.—This, the lowest cloud of all, is drawn out in a continuous level sheet across the sky. It is mostly to be seen near sunset, and continues during the night, but mostly disappears with the sunrise.
4.	Cirro-Cumulus.—A connected system of small roundish clouds, in close contact, presenting a mottled appearance. It is usually known as a “ mackerel sky”; and when scon in combination with Cirrus clouds, forebodes rain.
“A mackerel sky, with mares’ tails, Makes tall ships to carry low sails.”
5.	Cirro-Stratu*.—This is a horizontal or slightly inclined cloud, and as its name implies, is partly like tho Cirrus cloud, and partly like the Stratus. It is always the forerunner of a gale.
6.	Ca mulo-St rat us is formed by the last named blending with a Cumulus ; the Cumulus flattened at the top, and overhanging its base.
Lastly, 7. Nimbus.—This is the rain cloud; a dense cloud with a crown of Cirrus, and Cumulus Ixflow, and passing beneath into a shower of rain. One of the best pictures of a Nimbus is to be found in Dr. Heinrich Hoffmann's
Digitized by LnOOQle
700
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
BAROMETER.
it blows from
immortal “ Struwwelpeter,” on the page which depicts the tragedy of “ Flying Robert”
The height of clouds is sometimes considerably over a mile; small Cirrus clouds being often from three to five miles above our heads. But usually the height is much lower, and in bad weather seldom over half a mile.
When a cloud comes right down to the earth it is called a log-
But the best of all warnings of any change in the weather is the Barometer.
A great deal of misunderstanding is caused by the old-fashioned practice of marking barometers with “ Fair,” “ Set Fair,” “ Change,” “ Much Rain,” “ Stormy,” and the like. The real function of tho barometer is simply and entirely to measure the pressure of the atmosphere, and to show at once when the pressure changes. Now’ the pressure of the atmosphere will always l>e greater at one place than another, and the tendency of the air is naturally to rush from tho place where the pressure is greatest to the place where it is least And this is what we call “ wind.”
A change of wind usually brings a change of weather. If W. or S.W. in the British Isles, it will bring up a lot of
moisture it has gathered from the Atlantic. If it blows from E. or N.E., it comes to us across the table-land of Europe, and, therefore, will usually be dry. And so if the barometer points to a change of wind, we shall probably
have a change of weather, too.
But no rule can be given that will always hold true. The rising of the mercury usually heralds fair weather, and its fulling foul weather. In very hot seasons its falling usually foreshadows thunder; in winter it rises for a.
frost; during a frost a continued full foretells a thaw; and in a continued frost a rise indicates the approach of snow. If a change of weather follows very close upon the change in the barometer, it may be expected to last but a short time.
A ship will carry a thermometer as well as a barometer, and her officers must consider the indications of both instruments. And, in addition to the ordinary mercurial barometer, she will carry an Aneroid, which is a far more sensitive instrument, and shows minute changes that the mercurial barometer takes no note of
ANEROID BABOKETSB.
Digitized by
Google
ADMIRAL FITZROY'S RULES.
701
In the British Islands the ordinary range of a barometer is about an inch and a half, though it has been known to fall almost as much tis three inches. The thermometer in our northern hemisphere usually rises with easterly or southerly winds and falls with westerly or south-westerly winds.
Within the tropics the barometer varies much less than with us. It is rare for it to rise or fall there more than a tenth under ordinary circumstances ; and if it does fall further we may be sure of a storm. A curious point, however, about the barometer in the tropics, and one that must be borne in mind, is that the mercury has always four distinct variations every day—variations that, in tine weather, will be perfectly regular. It is highest at 10 a.m. and 10 p.m., it falls lowest at 4 a.m. and 4 p.m., and the difference between the highest and the lowest is usually about the tenth of an inch. So that if at 10 o’clock the mercury has not risen its usual tenth, this must be taken to be the same thing as a fall in the barometer, and bad weather mav be looked for.
The seaman’s rhyme for the Hurricane Months in the West Indies runs thus :—	,
“June, too soon;
July, stand by ;
August, look out you must;
.	.	September, remember;
October, all over.”	-
The handiest set of rules for- reading the barometer was put together by the late Admiral Fitzroy. He also put some of his observations into handy rhymes. For instance:—
‘‘When the wind shifts against the sun Trust it not, for back it will run.”
‘‘First rise after very low, Indicates a stronger blow.
“ Long foretold—long last. Short notice—soon past"
Of storms themselves, and storm signalling apparatus, we must speak in some future chapter.
Digitized by
Google
CHAPTER XXX.
TALES OF CASTAWAYS.
The Halaula ami Captain Pelsait—Wrecked on Houtman’a Abrolhoa—The Company on the Ithnds— Pelsart Departs in Search of Water—Proceedings of one Jerom Cornelis, ex-Apothecary—His Magnificence and his Bodyguard — Likewise hie Atrocities—The Bravery of Mr. Webhays and his Gallant Forty-five—Pelsart Returns—The Schooner Grafton—A Castaway Crew—Seal-diet—Food Runs Short—Contrivances of M. Rsgnal—The Captain Sails away and Brings Help—A Column of Smoke, a Dead Man, and a Double Mystery—Knight's Expedition—What the Esquimaux had to Tell—Peter Serrano—Legnat and his Comrades—A Plucky Dutchman—A List of Castaways.
AXyiTH their cross-staves and back-staves and dead reckonings, the old * ’ navigators did manage in a wonderful manner to saunter across the seas and arrive at tho port of their desire with "their ships covered with barnacles and themselves with glory.” On the other hand, they did now and then contrive to make very distressing mistakes.
There was one Francis Pelsart, commander of the ship Batavia, who sailed out of the Texel in October, 1628. As the sagacious reader has guessed, he was a Dutchman; and we have just seen what John Splinter Stavorinus had to say of the slatternly habits of the old Dutch navigators, and the reasons he gives why they were " frequently above ten degrees out in their reckoning.”
By the month of June, 1629, the Batavia had been nine months at sea, and still Captain Pelsart had his latitude fairly right. It was 30’ S., or thereabouts. But where he was in point of longitude he had no mom idea than the man in the moon. As a matter of fact, he was in Longitude 115’. That is to say, he had got himself into one of the most out-of-the-way corners on the face of this planet—a corner that is hardly more frequented to-day than it was two hundred and fifty years ago—near a group of islands, called Houtnian's Rocks, or Houtman’s Abrolhos, off the west coast of Australia.
It was a frosty night in June (June being the depth of winter in those latitudes), and the old ship was ploughing steadily oh her course, N.E. by > . with a fair wind blowing from the South Pole. The moon was full and high in the heavens, and the officer of the watch was moon-gazing. Francis Pelsart was lying sick in his cabin below.
All of a sudden the officer of the watch fancied he detected a very curious effect of moonlight on the -waves ahead. As it happened, he was
Digitized by LnOOQle
FELSAKT'S SHIPWBECK.
703
staring upon a silvery line of breakers, and steering straight upon it, too; and before be could gather his wits to shout out a warning the Batavia, went bump on a shoal off Houtman’s Abrolhos,
The shock brought Pelsart up on deck in less than a minute. Following his first and very natural impulse, he turned to the master, asked him what he meant by it, and upon what part of the world he .was steering now. There is an old story of a seaman who undertook to pilot a ship past Seiliy, asserting that he knew tho islands well. In half an hour he had run the ship hard aground. “ I thought,” stormed the captain, “ you told me you knew the Seiliy Islands well!” “So I do,” answered the pilot; “this is one.”
In this case the master excused himself by stating that they were in a port of the world where nobody bad ever been before; which was true, and stopped all further argument.
Looking about him, and finding that there was more water before than behind the ship, Pelsart gave orders to throw the cannon overboard, to lighten her. This did not float her oft’, however. She continued to bump in a most alarming manner; and by-and-by a heavy squall came down on them and made matters worse. The ship must bo lightened at all cost, so they now cut away the mainmast, which did them little good, for the stick, instead of falling overboard, lay hampering the deck.
At this point, they discovered, in the brilliant moonlight, two small islands lying close to them. A third and larger island lay some three leagues away, as they discovered when day broke. Pelsart, finding that all hopes for the vessel must be abandoned, now began to think of landing the women, children, and sick persons, who were making a great noise and creating something like a panic on board. So he lowered a boat., and dispatched the master to sec what the islands were like.
Day dawned and found them in this uncomfortable posture. At nine o’clock the master returned from examining the islands, and brought a fairly favourable report At ten o’clock, as the ship gave signs of breaking up, they began to take off the women and children as fast as they could. Some 160 people were taken off during the day: 120 to the larger island, and 40 to the smaller one close by. The crow began to behave badly. Numbers of them took to drinking. The consequence was that only twenty barrels of bread were landed, and very few barrels of water. Pelsart stuck by his ship and worked like a horse, until the master came off from ’one of the islands and said it was no use sending any more provisions on shore, for the people were wasting those they bad. Pelsart straightway went on shore to look into this foolishness, and the first thing he found was that they had hardly any water. This was serious, and he at once tried to return to the ship, in order to get some more water landed; but the weather had now become too heavy. Soon there camo swimming from the ship the carpenter, to tell Captain Pelsart that the men left on board the Batavia were in a desperate
Digitized by LnOOQle
704
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
case. Pelsart persuaded him to swim back and tell them to make rafts and float ashore on them. But the weather by this time was very bad indeed, and Pelsart, to his great grief, had for the moment to abandon his lieutenant and 70 men on board the wreck to what seemed certain death.
“ HE TRIED TO LEAP 0VBKB0AHD ” (p. T05).
The folk on tire islands were hardly better off than those on board the ship. The 40 people on the small island had only 40 gallons of water between them. The 120 people on the larger island had still less. Clearly something must be done, and the people on the small island pressed Pelsart eagerly to go and look for water on the neighbouring islands.
This (Pelsart answered) was all very well He was quite ready to go if
Digitized by
Google
HIS VOYAGE IN AN OPEN BOAT.
705
he had the consent of the people on the larger island; but, sooner than leave his ship’s company without the general consent of the whole party, he would e’en go back to the ship and perish in her. So he turned his boat’s head towards the larger island, intending to ask the consent of the people there.
But at this point the crew of his boat interfered. They first told him politely, but firmly, that they were in the right, that they had made up their minds, and they were not going to have him darkening counsel by taking the opinion of the muddle-headed fellows on the larger island. Pelsart expostulated, but they stood firm. He then tried to leap overboard, but, the coxswain leading, they seized hold of him and held him down in the boat by force. Upon this he began to temporise, and finally they settled it thus: Captain Pelsart was to have a paper from all his men saying that it was their wish that he should depart in search of water. This being agreed upon, Pelsart spent a day or two in searching about the islands, with no success. He then determined on bolder measures. He put a deck on his long boat, and started for the coast of Australia, with a smaller boat in tow.
Houtman’s Archipelago is scattered for some 50 miles north and south, “ Pelsart's group ” being about the most southerly point of it. The Australian coast lies about 50 miles away, and here Pelsart found himself on the 9th of June, five days after the wreck.
At the point where he made the coast now stands Gerald ton, with rich lead and copper mines at the back of it. But in 1628 there was not one single civilised human being in the whole of the great Australian continent : none nearer, indeed, than Batavia, in Java, more than 1,500 miles away.
Pelsart and his men saw a cove, and tried to make it; but the surf on the bar beat them off, and they cruised northwards along a coast which Pelsart likens to that about Dover. After a while they lost sight of land and did not regain it until they were in Lat. 24°, where some of the men made their way ashore through the rollers. This was probably Cape Cuvier. On the shore they found some naked savages, who took to their heels; but no water was to be seen. They then coasted along for ten days, and landed again in 22°, and found some rain-water. This was almost certainly at NorthWest Cape. Up to this point, from Dirk Hartog Island, in Lat. 26°, the coast had been trending slightly eastward; but Pelsart had followed it in the hope of finding water. From this point it runs eastward sharply and suddenly, and he must now push straight across the ocean for Batavia.
They had already come 400 miles before a strong southerly wind, at the rate of about 60 miles a day. Steering north-east across the ocean, they reached Batavia on July 2nd, twenty-four days out; the distance, as they made it, being some 1,500 or 1,600 miles. Thus they had achieved one of the most remarkable boat voyages in the history of the sea. Bligh's performance after 45
Digitized by LnOOQle
706
THE STORY OP THE SEA.
the mutiny of the Bounty* easily heads the list with 3,618 miles, but probably Pelsart comes next We are talking of open boats, of course.
Let us now leave Pelsart for the moment in safety at Batavia, and return to the people on the islands, among whom some very curious things were happening—“ such transactions,” says the chronicler, " as, in their condition, the reader would little expect, and, perhaps, will hardly credit. In order to their being thoroughly understood, it is necessary to observe that they had. for supercargo one Jerom Cornelis, who had been formerly an apothecary at Haarlem.”
This Jerom Cornelis hod been the last man to get ashore from the wreck, which he managed, after spending no less than ten days on board, by floating himself in on one of the yards. In Pelsart's absence he had to take the command. He seized this opportunity to come out in his true colours as ono of the finest combinations of ruffian and idiot that history holds record of.
Master Jerom Cornelis, ex-apothecary of Haarlem, determined to turn pirate. His notions were (1) to butcher all the honest men of the party, and (2), with the surviving ruffians, to lie in wait and surprise Pelsart on his return.
“ Divide et impera ” was Master Jerom’s motto. He dispatched a Mr. Weybhays and the chaplain, with 40 honest men, to another island to search for water. Weybhays found the water, and lit three fires—which was the signal agreed on. To his astonishment, no answer was made to it Ho had been sent on this fool’s errand in order that he might be well out of the way.
By-and-by he perceived a disturbance on the beach of one of the larger islands, and one or two poor fellows cast themselves into the sea and came swimming towards him. They brought a horrid tale of treachery. Cornelis had started a general massacre among the honest men left behind, and between 30 and 40 of them had perished.
Here was the situation:—A large island and two smaller ones. On the large island, Cornelis and his ruffians. On one of the smaller islands, Weybhays and his party, now increased to 45 men. On the other small island, the 40 who had been originally landed, as we have told. Now either of these two parties might give Pelsart warning on his approach and spoil Cornelis’s ambush. Therefore, they must be removed. .
Weybhays was the stronger. So “ Captain-General ” Cornelis, as he had dubbed himself by this time, began with the others. They offered a feeble resistance, and were put to the slaughter, with the exception of five women and seven children. Two of these women, it is to be feared, were the chaplains daughters. Cornelis took one of them to himself, and the other he handed over to his pet ruffian. A curious point about all pirates—as we shall seo
* Seo page 119 of thia volume.
Digitized byArc lie
MASTER JEROM CORNELIS, PIRATE.
707
when we come to the exploits of Amory, Low, and Blackbeard, and similar pests of the sea—was their almost babyish love of fine dress. These gory scoundrels strutted about their business in laced coats, cockaded hats, and bandoleers stiff with bullion and stuck with gold-mounted pistols. After tho instinct of his kind, Cornelis broke open the chests of merchandise saved from the Batavia, dressed himself in rich silks adorned with gold and silver, and swaggered about that desolate island like a perfect figure of fun, with a troop of bodyguards, clothed in scarlet livery, at his heels.
This did all very well for a while; but after some days of drunkenness and profligacy our apothecary bethought him that he still had to wipe out Weybhays and his sturdy forty-five on the little island. To this end he now embarked twenty-two well-armed men in two light shallops, and sent them to the attack. They came back after a while with bandaged heads and bloody noses, a soundly-beaten crew. Cornelis tried another expedition of thirty-seven men. Weybhays and his companions were without proper arms, but had furnished themselves with clubs having nails driven into their heads. With these they dashed out into the shallow water, and a fine tussle took place. In the end the pirates drew off with more bandaged heads and more bloody noses.
Matters were becoming awkward for the ex-apo thecary. Pelsart might be coming back at any moment, and then ho would find himself in a very tight corner. His followers were not likely to hold out long against Pelsart, who was the only survivor of the castaways who knew anything about navigation, the only man who could safely and surely take them back to civilised ground. It would be a very bad day for Master Cornelis when Captain Pelsart came back and asked what had been going on in his absence.
So Cornelis began to treat. An armistice was made on the following terms:—Weybhays and his men were to be no further molested, but were to restore a small boat in which one honest man had escaped to tho smaller island. The intention of this, of course, was to deprive Weybhays of means of communication on Pelsart’s approach. On the other hand, Weybhays was to have some of the stuff plundered from the ship to make clothes, of which his men were sorely in need. Upon these terms the truce was made.
But the terms were only a blind. The chief design of Cornelis in making them was to gain the ear of one or two of Weybhays’s men. He had great hopes of one or two French soldiers amongst the honest party. During the negotiations (which were chiefly carried on by the chaplain) there was, of course, a good deal of going and coming between the two islands. In the course of it Cornelis managed to get letters conveyed to these French soldiers, offering them G,000 livres (£240) apiece if they would betray Weybhays. This happened on the night before the treaty was to
Digitized by Goode
708
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
be signed. The French soldiers put their heads together, agreed that it was a very dirty trick, and, like fine fellows, took the letters straight to Weybhays.
Early next morning came Cornelis in his boat, nothing doubting. He had brought the clothes he had promised, and was attended only by throe or four men. Weybhays went down to the boat, helped to run it up on the beach, knocked a couple of pirates on the head, took Master Cornelis in his tom-fool’s dress and tied him up tight.
Only one of the' pirates made his escape back to the big island. Matters were in such a desperate strait that nothing was now to be done
“A PERFECT FIGURE OF HX " (p. 707).
but to make a prompt attack in the hope of rescuing Cornelis. This they did, and were badly beaten for the third time. And no sooner had they fled back to their island than they spied a fine Dutch frigate on the horizon. Her name was the Sardam, and Pelsart was on board.
Standing on the deck, Pelsart saw a great cloud of smoke rising from
Digitized by^OOQlC
“KNOCKED A COUPLE OF PIRATES ON THE HEAD” (p. PM
12
Digitized by
Digitized by
Google
THE END OF THE MUTINY.
709
one of the islands, and rejoiced to know that his people were not all dead. Quickly he had a boat lowered, put in some wine and provisions, and was making for the big island when a little boat shot out from the smaller one. She carried Weybhays, and Weybhays implored his captain to hurry back at once to the ship, as the mutineers meant to surprise her. In a few words he told the main story of the massacre, and while he was telling it he broke off and pointed to two boats that were now pushing off from the big island. Pelsart turned and rowed back to the frigate for his life.
He had hardly gained the deck when two boats ran alongside, filled with men arrayed in scarlet and armed to the teeth. Pelsart asked them what they meant by coming alongside armed. They answered that they would let him know when they got aboard. Pelsart, pointing to one of tho frigate’s guns, assured them in a calm voice that they had better give up quietly or ho would sink the two boats where they lay. There was no doubt that he meant it; so the mutineers gave in and were clapped in irons. That same night Jcrom Cornelis was brought on board, a very miserable figure. Next day they made ready to attack the mutineers remaining on the island; but these no sooner saw tho boat approach than they flung down their arms and submitted.
Tho frigate lay by the islands for about a week; in which time tho jewellery looted by Cornelis was collected, and a considerable quantity of silver recovered from tho wreck. Owing to the wealth on board, and to prevent all chance of another rising. Pelsart determined to deal summarily with the prisoners. They were tried and executed on the spot; and, weighing anchor, he stood north again and left the islands to two more centuries of solitude.
Digitized by
Google
710
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
On the 12th of November, 1863, the little schooner Grafton, Captain Musgrave, set sail from Sydney for the South Sea Islands. She passed between Port Jackson Heads that afternoon, and out into the Pacific, and was lost to sight. She never reached the islands. Early next year her name appeared in the list of ” Missing Vessels.”
A gale had taken her, driven her far south, and cast her among the Auckland Isles, a desolate group beyond the fiftieth parallel, and about 180 miles S. of New Zealand. And here, while the world went on as usual, Captain Musgrave, the mate, Mr. Ragnal, and the four men who made up the Grafton's crew, managed to hold body and soul together for a year and a half. Throughout this time Musgrave kept a journal, which was afterwards published ,
The captain describes the gale as “ one of unimaginable violence.” By great good fortune, however, the little vessel struck at a spot that might almost be called a harbour, and quite close to land, so that all the crew managed to get ashore. When the weather moderated, they waded out to tho ship, got the boards out of her, and built a house with them and the topmasts. Some small timber, too, was growing near the spot, and they found a spring of fresh water. Also, the seals were very numerous, and went “ roaring about the woods like wild cattle.” " If,” writes Captain Musgrave, “we had been fortunate enough to have kept the vessel afloat, I have no doubt but in two months, or less, we should have loaded her with sealskins. Mine appears a hard fate: after getting to where I might have made up for what has been lost, I lose the means of doing so. The vessel leaves her bones here, and God only knows whether we are all to leave our bones here also. And what is to become of my poor unprovided-for family ? It drives me mad to think of it. I can write no more.” Accordingly he writes no more for 'a fortnight. It was his best course. In such circumstances hard manual labour is the best thing for a man’s brain. Musgrave tucked up his sleeves and hammered away at the new house.
The island lay right out of the track of vessels, and the castaways made up their minds for the worst. For one thing, they had plenty of food to begin with. Seals abounded along the shore, and were knocked on the head with the greatest ease. Only the cows and calf tiger-seals were found to be eatable: not the black or bull-seals. There was also a plenty of birds. Musgrave tells us that the party shot as much as 150 lbs. of widgeon' in less than three hours. In one sense, the very tameness of the beasts was an evil omen, for it seemed to show that mankind never visited this spot The singing birds would actually feed out of the men’s hands, and take shelter in the house in flocks when threatened by larger birds of prey. The castaways took advantage of this plenty, and prepared to encounter the winter. They smoke-dried quantities of seal, and salted the widgeon. “ God is certainly good,” says Musgrave in his diary, “ in sending us plenty to eat.
Digitized by
Google
THE GRAFTON SCHOONEK.
711
I hope and pray He will soon send someone in here that will take us away.” The allusions in the diary to his wife and children are most pathetic. “ Sunday, March 13, 1864.—My heart beats fast to-night as I sit down to write, somewhat similar to what it might do if I was about writing a love-letter. I know that many a bitter tear has been shed for me by this time, and most likely to-day, as tliis is the end of another dreary month since I left those I loved so much; and how many more must pass, or how they will pass them, until we meet again, or whether we shall ever meet again on earth—Heaven only knows.”
But, although desponding, the captain worked hard to encourage his men, and was ably backed up by Mr. Ritgnal, the mate. On the chance of attracting the attention of a passing ship, they rigged up a flagstaff on the cliffs, and a signal-board, setting forth their hard case. From their ship’s charts they knew the size of the island on which they were wrecked ; but exploring it was a very different matter, for the land behind them was impenetrable with scrub and swamp. They made one or two attempts, but were always beaten back. The reader will kindly bear this in mind, for it is important.
Mr. Ragnal was an excellent cook. Indeed, as the narrative goes on, we are continually discovering fresh cause to admire Mr. Ragnal. But his cookery wins the first applause. During the spring tides, when the foreshore could be searched for all manner of shell-fish, he even provided a meal of four courses. “ We then had stewed or roasted seal, fried liver, fish, and mussels.”
Fish, however, was scarce: this was tho one drawback of having so many seals. And by-aud-by, as winter came on—we are dealing with the Antipodes, remember—all manner of food became scarcer. The singing birds, too, began to leave them, and the parrots with whom they had made friends. At the end of three months the bill of fare had become decidedly meagre. “ Breakfast — seal stewed down to soup, fried roots, boiled seal, or roast ditto, with water. Dinner—ditto, ditto. Supper—ditto, ditto. This repeated eighteen times per week. Mussels or fish are now quite a rarity; we have not been able to get either for some time. The man who killed the seal to-day had been fishing nearly all day, and had caught one small fish. The men have stood it bravely thus far, but it grieves me unspeakably to hear them wishing for things which they cannot get. I heard one just now wishing he had but a bucket of potato-peelings!” Mr. Musgrave adds plaintively that he ‘‘can scarcely call this ‘living.’” In a short time the ink failed, and the journal itself came to be written in seal’s blood.
Seal every day—toujour* perdrix—was bad; but no seal at all was a great deal worse; towards September, 1864, the seals began to desert. “It is evident,” says the diary, “ that the seals have left this part of the island entirely; we were out in the boat yesterday”—their tiny ship’s-boat—“but did not see one. I have often thought I could get across to the western shore of the island by a valley at the head of the bay, where I imagine
Digitized by LnOOQle
712
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
it is not more than three miles across. We started in the boat the first
thing after our breakfast, and landed at the place where I intended to cross. We left the boat, and the three men who were in her started to go with me; but the travelling was so horribly bad that when we had got half a mile two of them turned ■ back, leaving the other man and myself
to pursue our way without them, which we did for about a mile farther;
and I may say we had accomplished this distance by creeping on our bellies, very seldom getting as high as our hands and knees. I have described some bad roads before. This beats description, and it also beats me; and this is the first time I have been beaten in getting through the scrub and swamp. The time which we occupied in going and returning this
mile and a half may give some idea of what sort of travelling it was ; we
were about seven hours in doing it! I got a severe cold
over it, which was the only reward
of my trouble
of
making a very
iin-
that
wo
them so long not,
is only
•' Had scarce,” would
to it:
Thus was missed the chance portant discovery.
One very fine seal had stuck they became quite attached to
however, on account of the sweetness of his disposition, for he would show fight on very little provocation. Still, on a desert island, a friend is a friend; and this one they called “ Royal Tom.
But the value of a friend discovered in time of need, not meat been so very
writes the captain, ' not have killed ‘ Royal Tom.’ ” No doubt he would have been slain before, but (as we have explained) the black bull seal is not good to eat. But even the bull seal is not now to be disdained. “Not very long ago, wo thought it would be impossible to eat this kind of seal; and indeed they are not by any means fit for food, for the
WEBB KNOCKED ON TUB HEAD ” (p. 710).
Digitized by GOOQle
SUFFERINGS OF THE CASTAWAYS.
713
strong smell of tho meat is enough not only to disgust but to stifle a person. But what are starving men to do ? and we may consider ourselves such." By October there were no fresh seals left, and they were thrown back upon the provisions they had dried and smoked. Day after day they crawled up to their look-out station on Flagstaff Point, and over and over again they repainted their signal-board. It was the time of year
when a vessel might most probably be expected; and Captain Musgrave, surveying as much of the coast as he could command, and noting that in some places the breakers were very dangerous, and in others the mountains rose sheer from the water’s edge, writes: “I hope no vessel will go humbugging about these places looking for us.” He need not have troubled about that. He and his comrades were as dead men—out of sight and out of mind. Their vessel was entered as missing, and nobody, except their own families, troubled about them. Their clothes were worn out by this time. “ We are not yet reduced to wearing seal-skin clothes entirely, but those which we do wear look most deplorable, although they arc neither ragged nor dirty; but they are patched to such a degree—old canvas, old gunny-bags, anything we can get hold of, goes in for patches;
Digitized by LnOOQle
714
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
and we use canvas-ravellings for thread, and sew everything with a sailneedle.”
More than once their thoughts had turned to the wreck upon the sands and the chances of rendering her seaworthy; and once or twice they hod set to work upon her in good earnest. Their first attempt was made in the spring; and a miserable time they had, working from half-tide up to their waists in water, and with the thermometer below freezing; but after getting all the ballast out, they found that neither by pumping nor by baling could they keep the water down. Her sides were stove in in several places. At length they let her fall back on her side again, determining that nothing could be done. This was in August.
In November, when hunger began to press upon them, the captain asked himself another question. “ The Grafton is useless as she lies, but cannot something be made of her timbers ? ” By this time they had spent a whole year on the island. The captain notes: “ I have got quite grey-headed. My hair is now all coming out." After some thought, he determined to build a cutter of about ten tons. The principal timbers wore obtained -from the woods close by, excepting the keelson, which they cut out of the Grafton's mainmast, If it is asked why they did not use more timbers from the ship, we must answer that their stock of tools consisted only of an American axe and adze, a hammer and a gimlet—a very poor assortment for taking the ship to pieces.
They had no ship’s carpenter among them, but the versatile Kagnal did his best. He had some little experience of blacksmith’s work, and undertook to make tools for them as soon as they could get some charcoal made for a forge. In tho schooner’s bottom they found a quantity of old iron, and amongst it a block, which they turned into an anvil. In their wanderings about the coast they had come upon a deserted sealer’s camp on an islet at a little distance from the shore, which they had christened, from its shape, "Figure-of-Eight Island”; and here they had found an old saw-file. Mr, Ragnal ground this smooth on a grinding-stone, and with a chisel, made out of an old broken fiat file, cut fresh teeth in it; but unfortunately, as he was cutting almost the last tooth, he broke it -the part which goes into the handle—and about two inches of the file went. “I think,” writes Musgrave at this point, "he can manage to cut teeth in the saw with it, I am afraid that augers will be the most difficult tools to make; but, now that the job is fairly undertaken, I have not the slightest doubt of final success, in some shape or other. Everyone works cheerfully and well: I sincerely hope nothing will occur to damp either. We work from six in the morning until six in the evening.”
Unhappily, all this labour was destined to be in vain. They got the keel of their little craft ready: the stem, the sternpost, and a number of timbers for bolting them together. But there they stuck. “ Mr. Ragnal has
Digitized by
Google
THEY FIT OUT THE BOAT.
715
made a saw, chisels, gouges, and sundry other tools. His ingenuity and dexterity have, indeed, surpassed my expectation, but making augers has proved a hopeless failure. Assiduously he wrought at one for three days, and it was not until there was not a shade of hope left that he gave it up; and if he had had the material to make them out of, I feel confident he would have succeeded. The only steel he had was two picks and some shovel-blades, which tools we took from Sydney, tn hope of having some mining operations to perform at Campbell’s Island. It was truly deplorable to view the faces of all as we stood around him when he decidedly pronounced it impossible for him to make one: they all appeared, and I have no doubt felt, as if all hope was gone. It went like a shot to my heart, although I had begun to anticipate such a result, and had made up my mind for immediate action accordingly; but when I saw positively that I must, as a last card, put my project into practice, I felt I was tempting Providence; for my tacit project and unalterable resolution is to attempt a passage to Stewart's Island in the boat.”
This boat was just a ship’s dinghy, twelve feet in the keel, and crazy with old age. The voyage to Stewart’s Island was something like 150 miles; and of the seas through which he hoped to pass the captain thus expresses himself: “ I have been round both Capes (that is, Cape Horn and Cape of Good Hope), and crossed the Western Ocean many times; but never have I experienced, or read, or heard of anything in the shape of storms to equal those of this place.” But it was a question between making the attempt and starving; and if they could manage to strengthen the crazy boat, to lengthen her three feet, and heighten her one foot on the gunwale, before the beginning of April—the most favourable season for starting—Musgrave was determined to try. They had no time to lose, and they worked from daybreak until half-past nine at night. Not only had the boat to be altered, but sails, mast, gear, everything must bo newly contrived. Once, when a gimlet was broken, they all gave way to despair, until the unbeaten Ragnal managed to set it right. Almost worse than the lack of tools was the torture the men sutiered from the attacks of sand-flics, “If the wind is moderate in the least degree—that is to sav, if it is not blowing a whole gale—they are flying about in myriads from daylight to dark (fortunately, they modestly retire in the night), and alight on you* in clouds, literally covering every part of your skin that happens to be exposed; and not only that, but they get inside our clothes and bite there. I do not think that at the present moment I could place the point of a needle on any part of my hands or face clear of their bites.” At times the attacks of these insects forced them to desist from their work for awhile. Sometimes, when it came to putting a plank into the boat, it would not bend, although well steamed; and then a new plank had to be cut out with a saw that required sharpening every few minutes.
Digitized byVrOOQlC
716
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
So tho time dragged on—a time now of heavy rains, bringing dysentery with them. The working days were hard enough, but days of enforced inaction were far worse. When not too tired, the men spent their evenings reading. On reaching the island, the captain had set up a night school, and taught his men to read out of the Bible.
By this time they were reduced to roots and water. The boat was finished at midsummer. Ragnal sat up far into the night of June the 26th, forging the last few nails. Next day the boat was launched; but, to their dismay, she proved so crank as to frighten some of the men. I.t was obvious that with all five on board she would be overcrowded- So they agreed that two should remain on the island, while the others should make the voyage, and, if they reached New Zealand alive, return with help. George Harris and Henry Tolgee, it was settled, should remain behind.
But now the stormy weather began again, and it was not imtil July the 19th, 1865, that the three adventurers pushed off from the shore. They had hardly proceeded twenty miles when they were overtaken by a strong south-west gale. It was a fair wind, but it endangered the boat, and for five days and nights Musgrave stood on his feet, holding on to the rope with one hand and pumping with the other. “ The boat was very leaky, and kept the pump almost constantly going. As my anxiety would not permit me to leave the deck, I performed this part of the work while the other two relieved each other at the helm. The wind, although fair, was so strong that wo were obliged to lay-to nearly half the time, and the sea was constantly breaking over the little craft; and how she lived through it I scarcely know. I had not eaten one ounce of food from the time of leaving until we arrived, and only drunk about half a pint of water; yet I felt no fatigue until the night before we landed, when I suddenly became quite exhausted, and lay down on the deck, over which there was no water washing for the first time since we left the island. We were now close to the land. I lay for about half an hour, and then got up again, feeling that I bad just sufficient strength remaining to enable me to hold out till the next day; but, had we been out any longer, I feel convinced that I should never have put my foot on shore again.”
On the 25th they spied land, and arrived in safety at Port Adventure, Stewart’s Island, where they were hospitably received by Captain Cross, of the Flying Send, who took the three across to Invercargill on the mainland, Here a subscription of over £100 was raised for them, and the Flying Scud chartered to return forthwith to the Aucklands. Though naturally anxious to return at once to his family, Captain Musgrave could not think of doing so until assured of the safety of his late companions. He, therefore, returned with the relief expedition.
Wo now come to the most remarkable part of all this remarkable narrative. After weeks of baffling winds, the Flying Scud came in sight of her destination,
Digitized by LnOOQle
"THE BODY OF A SAILOR” (p. 718).
718 THE STORY OF THE SEA.
when smoke was seen ascending from the land, but in quite a different part of the island from that where Musgrave had left the two men. Musgrave knew from experience that they could not have penetrated the thick scrub to this point. Though a good deal puzzled, he determined wisely to bring the vessel to anchor at the same point from which he had sailed five weeks before; and there, sure enough, he found the two men. " As we did not come in sight of our old house until within a mile of it, the boys did not see us until we were close upon them. Then the one who saw us ran into the house to tell the other; and, before they reached the beach, Captain Cross and myself had landed, leaving the cutter under weigh, as there was too much wind and sea to anchor her. One of them, the cook, on seeing me, turned as pale as a ghost, and staggered up to a post, against which he leaned for support, for he was evidently on the point of fainting; while the other, George, seized my hand in both of his, and gave my arm a severe shaking, crying, ' Captain Musgrave, how are ye, how are ye ? ’ apparently unable to say anything else.”
The poor follows, during the last week or so, had been obliged to live on mice! But, although in this desperate condition, they had spirit enough left to quarrel with one another; and within the last few hours their disagreement had become so acute that they were actually on the point of separating and living apart 1
They were taken on board, and supplied with a good supper of fish and potatoes, tea, and bread and butter. But Captain Musgrave was now vexing himself in mind about the smoke that he had seen from another part of the island. There was no mistake about it: the smoke had been there, and had been seen by everybody on board. Captain Cross, too, was worried about it, and determined to run along shore, on the chance of discovering some other unfortunate shipwrecked people. Some of the crew now remembered that there had once been a whaling station on the island. “If you had known of that,” they said to Musgrave, “you might have found houses imd vegetables, and plenty of pigs.” There was a whaling station, though Musgrave and his men could never have reached it through the scrub; and now, when the exploring party reached it, they found only a few levelled spots where the huts had once stood, and here and there the trace of a garden fence. A few flax bushes, too, showed that the place had once been cultivated; but long rank grasses grew over the whole of the deserted settlement. " I am glad we did not know of this place,” says Captain Musgrave, “when we were cast away, for, if we had reached it, it would have been a terrible disappointment.”
A terrible disappointment it had been to one poor solitary soul, whose name will never bo known. Among the rank grass in the long-deserted garden they came upon the body of a sailor, not long dead of starvation. Beside him lay a common roof slate, on which the dying man had tried
Digitized by^OOQlC
A DOUBLE MYSTERY.
719
to scratch some record; but of the feeble zigzags nothing could bo deciphered but his Christian name. He had crept to die under the shelter of a wretched frame-house; but this had fallen to pieces around him, without touching the body, but leaving it exposed to the weather. It lay upon a bed of grass, with some boards underneath, raising it a few inches from the ground. Within reach stood a bottle containing a little water, and hard by a small heap of limpet and mussel shells. The body was well clad in good sea-cloth. An old shoe was on the right foot, and the left was tied up with woollen rags, as if it had been wounded. Round tho nock hung a heart-shaped relic, made of leather—a keepsake, doubtless. This, and the slate, and a lock of the man’s hair, Captain Musgrave brought away with him.
The party returned to the ship and resumed their cruise along the desolate shore, keeping their glasses fixed on it to the last. But they found no further sign of human occupation.
And here Captain Musgrave’s journal ends. But, in an appendix, we are told that on the J Oth of May, 1864, when Musgrave and his men had boon about six months on the island, the Invercauld, Captain Dalgarno, was wrecked on the north-west end of Auckland, and nineteen of the crew managed to reach the land. Of these, sixteen died of starvation; but three of them survived until May 20th, 1865, when they were rescued by a Portuguese vessel—which never came within sight of Flagstaff Point, where Musgrave, day by day, was straining his eyes over the sea—and carried to Callao, and thence to England. So two sets of English castaways had occupied the same small island for more than a year in complete ignorance of each other’s presence 1
But what of the starved sailor found by the crew of the Flying Saul? He did not belong to the Grafton: he could not possibly have come from the Invercauld. From the appearance of the body, he had been dead but a very short while. But whence that poor creature came, and what made the smoke that was seen from the deck of the Flying Scud, are mysteries to this day.
One of the very saddest ot castaway stories is that of Knight’s expedition to Marble Island in the opening years of the eighteenth century. Mr. Knight, an old servant of the Hudson’s Bay Company, and for a long time governor of their leading establishment on Nelson’s River, had learned from the Indians that in the extreme north of their territory, and on the banks of a navigable river, there was a rich mine of native copper. Knight was so impressed with the value of this information that, after much trouble, he induced the Company to send out an expedition for the purpose of investigating the matter. Knight himself, nearly eighty years of age, had a general charge of the expedition, the vessels of which were commanded
Digitized by LnOOQle
720
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
by Captains Barlow and Vaughan. The expedition left in the spring of 1719, and never returned: it was not till forty-eight years afterwards that
any information was gleaned conceniing the melancholy fate of the whole
party. In the year 1707, some of the Company’s men employed in whaling
close to the shore, where, in a harbour, they
discovered the remains of a house, the
hulls of two ships under water, and guns, anchors, cables, an anvil, and other heavy articles, which had not been removed by the natives. The following, from a work by Samuel Hearne, sufficiently indicates the misery to which the party had been reduced before death terminated their
near Marble Island stood in
STING
ESGl IMAVX Hf SLEDGE.
Island it was
ESOVHUtl WATCHING SEAL HOLE.
sufferings. It was obtained, through the medium of an Esquimaux interpreter, from the natives :—
When the vessels arrived at Marble
very late in the
fall, and in getting them into the harbour the largest received much damage; but, on being fairly" in, the English began to build the house, their number at that time seeming to be about fifty. As soon as the ice permitted in the following summer (1720), the Esquimaux paid them another visit, by which time the number of the English was very greatly reduced, and those that were living seemed very unhealthy. According to the account given by the Esquimaux, they were then very busily employed, but about what they could not easily describe, probably in lengthening the long boat, for at a little distance from the house there was now lying a great quantity of oak chips, which had been made most assuredly by carpenters.
Digitized by GOOQle
KNIGHTS EXPEDITION.
721
And sickness and famine occasioned such havoc among the English that by the setting in of the second winter their number was reduced to twenty. That winter (1720) some of the Esquimaux took up their abode on the opposite side of the harbour to that on which the English had built their houses, and frequently supplied them with such provisions as they had, which
“ 11 TEH STALKED DOM 5
TO WELCOME HIM ” (j) 722).
chiefly consisted of whale’s blubber, seal’s flesh, and train oil. When the spring advanced the Esquimaux went to the continent, and on their visiting Marble Island again, in the summer of 1721, they only found five of the English alive, and those were in such distress for provisions that they eagerly ate the seal’s flesh and whale’s blubber quite raw as they purchased it from the natives. This disordered them so much that three of them died in a
46
Digitized by^OOQlC
722
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
few days, and the other two, though very weak, made a shift to bury them. Those two survived many days after the rest, and frequently went to the top of an adjacent rock and earnestly looked to the south and east, as if in expectation of some vessels coming to their relief After continuing there a considerable time together, and nothing appearing in sight, they sat down close together and wept bitterly. At length one of the two died, and the other’s strength was so far exhausted that he fell down and died also in attempting to dig a grave for his companion.
Of solitary castaways, the most famous, perhaps, are Alexander Selkirk and the Mosquito Indian of Juan Fernandez, to both of whom we shall come in due time, But a more thorough-going castaway than either was one Peter Serrano, a Spaniard, who has bequeathed his name to a barren rock in the middle of the Caribbean Sea. He was a man without goats, tame cats, pimento-pepper, and the other luxuries that made life tolerable to Selkirk: he was, as Mr. Chadband would have said, “ without flocks and herds, without tents or dyed apparel” He lived for four years on cockles, shrimps, and turtle. He had a steel in his pocket, and dived in the sea until he fished up a couple of flints, and so procured a fire. When the sun shone he dried his strips of turtle-flesh. Water he obtained by setting out the larger turtle-shells to catch the rain, and the smaller shells he used for cups. He protected his driftwood fire with a screen of turtle-shells. In fact, he seems to have been able to use the turtle for everything except an umbrella: when the sun’s rays became unbearable, he entered the water and stayed there until tho day cooled.
His clothes wore out. Always fertile in resource, he hit on the expedient of going without any, and lived naked for three years and eight months, scaring off the passing ships (who were afraid of pirates) by the smokesignals he sent up to attract their attention. At the end of this time a visitor dropped in—on top of a cask.
The visitor had floated off a wreck. .Peter stalked down to welcome him, his body covered with bristles, and his genial smile hidden in an immense beard.
“ Seflor, I bid you welcome I ” Peter waved a hand pleasantly and advanced to kiss the new-comer. The new-comer began to yell with terror. Upon this Peter began to yell, too. Each imagined the other to be Satan. However, after the new castaway had pattered out a few credos, Peter recovered himself sufficiently to offer him something to eat.
By the end of the day the two men were on the best of terms. By the end of the week they had quarrelled, and did not speak. They patched up their misunderstanding just before a Spanish vessel came to the island and took them off. Serrano had lived on the rock just four years. His companion died on the homeward voyage, but Peter himself reached Spain,
Digitized by LnOOQle
PETER SERRANO.
723
where he attracted much notice, and was presented to the Emperor Charles V„ who gave him a pension. Upon this he retired to Panama, where he died some years after.
The list of such castaways is a very long one. There is a tradition of two men thrown upon an island in the Hebrides in 1615. They were crossing from England to Ireland in a small passage boat when a French privateer swooped down on them. A stiff gale arose, however, and forced the Frenchmen to cut the tow-rope. So they drifted upon the island, and managed to live there for six weeks upon sea-birds' eggs. At the end of that time one of them tumbled over a cliff and disappeared. The survivor held out for eleven months, when a Flemish timber ship, under the command of Pick man, the reeoverer of the Armada guns, luckily grounded near the island. Some of the crew landed and began to search the rocks for eggs, when the castaway appeared and scared them almost out of their wits. He was taken on board; and pretty soon a wind arose that sent their vessel into deep water. So the castaway was safely conveyed to London.
Then there are stories of ten men wrecked in 1638 on the Roncadories near the Gulf of Nicaragua, of whom one only was rescued by a passing ship two years later. Also of a Dutch merchantman that, about the year 1600, calling at the Mauritius—then uninhabited—found a mad and naked Frenchman, of whose previous history nothing was ever known. Also of the philosopher Lcgnat and his comrades, who were cast on the Isle of Rodriguez, where no cocoanut trees grew; “ but precisely at the period of their residence there the sea threw upon the coast several cocoanuts in a state of germination ; as if Providence had designed to prevail upon them, by this useful and agreeable gift, to remain on tho island and cultivate it" They planted the nuts, and stayed long enough on the island to see the trees reach a height of four feet. At the end of eighteen months they began to pine for female society, and, in spite of Legnat’s remonstrances, they left the island in search of it, a step which brought them to grief. “ For my part,” says St. Pierre, who tells the story, “ I had no doubt that, had they reposed in Providence the confidence they ought, it would have sent them wives to their desert island as it had sent them the cocoanuts.”
There is an amusing story, too, of a Dutch castaway. In the days when the island of St. Helena was an unpeopled waste, long before the coming of the great exile who has made its name famous, a Dutch vessel, returning from the West Indies, cast anchor off its coast. In a short while a boat was lowered. The occupants, besides the crew, were a dead officer in a coffin and a downcast seaman in irons. This seaman, for some offence against discipline, had been condemned to death by the captain ; but, in consequence of an appeal for mercy signed by his messmates, was ordered to be marooned on this desolate island instead of being hung up to the yardarm. It is
Digitized by Goode
724
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
probable that even this grace would have been denied him but for the dead officer, for whose burial the ship put into harbour.
The grave was dug; the officer buried; the crew departed; the ship weighed anchor. The Dutchman, on his side, lost no time He opened the new-made grave, dragged out the coffin, tumbled his dead superior out of it, and carried it down to the shore, where, having launched his extemporised boat, he jumped in in a trice, and, using the lid as a paddle, quickly (thanks to a calm) overtook the departing ship. He was taken on board and pardoned in consideration of his pluck.
But stories of solitaries and of castaway crews, such as those of the Doddington, Alceste, Commerce, and St. Abbs, are almost endless, and might, at any rate, be extended to fill a volume rather than a chapter of this work. As for the solitaries, it is doubtful who bears off the prize for length of time. Robinson Crusoe, we know, spent “ eight-and-twenty years all alone in an uninhabited island on the coast of America, near the mouth of the great river Oroonoque.” This, of course, is fiction. Selkirk passed but five years on Juan Fernandez. At this distance of time we can hardly tell whether the memories of one Captain Edward Thompson, who sailed from Hull “ in the Love and Unity (whom God preserve), Anno 1750, on a voyage to Greenland,” be fact or fiction. At any rate, he tells us that he was afterwards on officer in H.M.S. the Stirling Castle, and, being at Tobago, he roamed off in search of wild oranges. There, in the woods, he discovered a venerable man, who addressed him in French and informed him that he had lived twenty-one years in that solitary spot, having no human intercourse except with the Indians, who occasionally visited his hermitage on their hunting expedition, gave him part of their game, and shaved off his beard with a knife; but he never paid enough attention to their language to converse in it. He once had been a priest at Martinique; but, having given offence, had been seized one dark night and transported to Tobago. He declined all offers to convey him back to Europe, declaring that he was perfectly happy. So, like the prisoner of Chi lion, a castaway may come in time to prefer his narrow bounds to liberty; or, perhaps, we had better say that in time he comes to differ from civilised man in his notions of true liberty.
Digitized by LnOOQle
CHAPTER XXXI.
SEA-SONGS AND CHANTIES.
“ The Sea, the Sea, the Open Sea! ”—In Poetry and in Fact—A Sick Port—English Sea-Bongs—“ Hie Angel Gabriel”—“The Golden Vanity"—“Admiral Benbow”—“The Bold Benjamin”—“Hammer and Tonga”—A Ballad of Five Frigates—“The London Man-of-War”—Working Songs and Chanties—Their Use and Origin—Capstan Songs—Songs for Setting a Furling Sail—For Pumping and getting into Port—“ Storm-along "—“ Home, dearie, Home ”—Dibdin's Songs—A Forecastle Concert—Three Senga on a favourite theme.
“The sea, the sea, the open sea I
The blue, the fresh, the ever free, Without a mark, without a bound, It runneth the earth’s wide regions round, It plays with the clouds, it mocks the skies. Or like a cradled creature lies.
‘I'm on the sea, I’m on the sea!
I am where I would ever be,
With the blue above and the blue below, And silence whereso’er I go.
If a storm should come and awake the deep, What matteri what matter? I shall ride and sleep.
“I love (oh, how I love!) to ride
On the fierce, foaming, bursting tide,
When every mad wave drowns the moon-----”
TN these appalling circumstances a practical seaman would almost certainly lay-to. And we shall probably go some distance before finding a seaman who will confess that he loves (Oh, kow he loves!) the motion of a vessel lying-to under easy canvas in a steep sea. Therefore, it is not altogether surprising to learn that Bryan Waller Procter (Barry Cornwall), the author of the above lines, was horribly ill whenever he ventured upon salt water: insomuch that his wife—at times a somewhat unfeeling lady, and always a good sailor—used to march up and down the deck, humming a strain of his jovial sea-song—
“I’m on the sea, I’m on the sea,
I am where I would ever be”
Digitized by LnOOQle
720
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
—as he lay in the agonies of a Channel crossing, huddled in shawls and a tarpaulin, with barely sufficient animation left to entreat, “ For heaven’s sake, my dear, don’t' ”
It is our business in this chapter to treat of the mass of English poetry that deals with the sea. Great as it is, it will seem very little to us when wc reflect that the sea has been the scene of our greatest national triumphs,
“AND ON THE HUMMOWE, BY NINE OF THE CLOCKE.”
—From the Ballad of ''Sir Andrei Barton.
and that in her poetry lies the glory of England’s literature. On the whole, our poets have been but a land-lubberly lot. Of course, a great deal of evidence to the contrary might be produced. There is “ Falconer’s Shipwreck," There are ballads, from “ Sir Patrick Spens ’’ and “ Andrew Barton ” to Browning's “ Herve Riel ” and Tennyson’s glorious “ Ballad of the Revenge.” Mr. Swinburne still hymns the sea for us, and Mr. Kipling has given us “The (Jalley Slave.” “The English Flag,” and the fine “Envoi” of his “Barrack-Room Ballads.’’ There is the ever-splendid “Ancient Mariner.” There are Campbell’s great lyrics, “ Ye Mariners of England ” and “ The Battle of the Baltic,” and Kingsley's “ Pleasant Isles of Aves ”; Macaulay’s ‘ The Last Buccaneer ”; Browning’s “ Over the Sea our Galleys Went ” and “ Home
Digitized by
Google
BRITISH SEA SONGS.
727
Thoughts from Abroad”; and Stevenson’s “Christmas at Sea”—to take instances at random. Cowper has lamented the Royal George, and Yule the Birkenhead. Of passable songs, too, we have a certain number—Arnold’s " Death of Nelson," Andrew Cherry’s *' Bay of Biscay,” Thomson's “ Rule, Britannia,” Parker’s “Ye Gentlemen of England,” Prince Hoare's “ Saucy Arethusa" Charles Dibdin’s “Poor Jack” and "Tom Bowling.” And, lastly, quite a large number of poets have walked down to the sea-shore, and, standing on the beach among the limpets, have commanded—
“ Roll on, thou deep and dark blue ocean—roll ! ”
—or have made it the confidant of their spiritual and domestic affairs.
All these may be quoted without upsetting our case. For our wealth is not to be proved by a dozen or twenty specimens: it is to be proved rather by comparing the bulk and excellence of British sea-songs with the bulk and excellence of British achievements on tho sea, and the national importance of those achievements. It may be tested by such a question as this-— What have our poets done for the defeat of the Great Armada ? They have done nothing; or next to nothing; for Macaulay’s fragment merely describes how the alann passed inland, and the effect it had on such places as Stonehenge and Richmond Hill. England has never been so rich in poets as she was in the year of that great victory, yet none of them found in it occasion for a great poem. To come to a more recent time—the time of the French wars—who has sung worthily of the Glorious First of June ? The only verse called up by the mention of that great sea-fight is Canning’s gibe on Jean Bon St. Andr6:—
“ In battles much delighting ;
He fled full soon On the First of June, But he hade the rest keep fighting."
And no one can hold that Arnold's “Death of Nelson," with its ridiculous invitation to fight for “England, home and beauty” in order to provide a rhyme for the famous signal, was at all a worthy commemoration for Trafalgar.
Sir Philip Sidney confessed that he never heard the ballad of “ Chevy Chase,” even from a blind fiddler, but it stirred him like the sound of a trumpet; and one is inclined to suspect that the true magic of the old fighting-ship is to be found/ not in the elaborate compositions of the poets, but in the rude ballads—often very wheezy doggerel—invented and sung by our old seamen themselves.
One of tho best of these is the ballad of the Angel Gabriel, of Bristol: how she sailed under Captain Netherway (“ That was his noble name ”) to scour the Spanish seas ;■—
“ This lusty ship of Bristol
Sailed out adventurously
Against the foes of England, Her strength with them to try;
Digitized by
Google
728
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
Well victualled, rigged, and manned she was, With good provision still,
Which made men cry, ‘To sea, to sea, With the Angel Gabriel /1
•	•	•	•	•
“ They waving up and down the seas, Upon the ocean main,
“HIKE, THEY KNOW 1 SPEAK THE THVTH.”
—“Herve llul.' ^K. Browning
‘It is not long ago,’ quoth they, ‘That England fought with Spain.
O would the Spaniard we might meet, Our stomachs to fulfil !
We would play him fair a noble bout
With our Angel Gabriel.’
They had no sooner spoken
But straight appeared in sight Three lusty Spanish vessels. Of warlike trim and might;
Digitized byGoogle
“THE ANGEL GA Bill EL."
729
With bloody resolution
. They thought our men to spill,
And they vowed that they would make a prize Of our Angel Gabriel.
“ Our gallant ship had in her
Full forty fighting men ;
With twenty piece of ordnance We played about them then
From th? Design by Sir Kael pat**. By I'ermine ion if the Art Union if l.uudon.
A SAIL ' A BAIL '
—“ The Ki me of the Ancient Mariner," by S. T. Coleridge.
With )>owder, shot, and bullets— Right well we worked our will, And hot and bloody grew the fight With our Angel Gabriel."
No less than seven times did the Spaniards board:—
“ With that their three ships boarded us Again with might and main ;
But still our noble Englishmen Cried out: ‘A fig for S|ain!’
Though seven times they boarded us, At last we showed our skill,
And made them feel what men we were On the Angel Gabriel"
Digitized by GOOQle
730	THE STORY OF THE SEA.
The fight lasted for seven hours, by which time (says the ballad) W ith Spanish blood for fathoms round the sea was coloured red.” The Spanish ships then gave it up and fled into Cales. The singer concludes gleefully : —
“We had within our English ship But only three men slain, And five men hurt, the which, I hope, Will soon be well again. At Bristol we were landed. And let us praise God still, That thus hath ■ blest our lusty hearts And our Angel Gabriel.”
Another favourite old ballad is “ The Golden Vanity,” which we will quote at length. The “cruel captain’’ is supposed to have been Sir Walter Raleigh, who, for various reasons, was always an unpopular commander; but the story is, of course, pure invention.
“THE GOLDEN VANITY.
“ A ship I have got in the North Country, And she goes by the name of the Golden Vanity ; O, I fear she’ll be taken by a Spanish ga-la-lie As she sails by the Low-lands low.
“To the Captain then up spake the little cabin-boy; He said, ‘ What is my fee, if the galley I destroy— The Spanish Ga-la-lie if no more it shall annoy, As you sail by the Low-lands low?’
“ ‘ Of silver and of gold I will give to you a store, And my pretty little daughter that dwelleth on the shore; Of treasure and of fee as well. I'll give to thee galore, As we sail by the Low-lands low.’
“ Then the boy bared his breast, and straightway leapbd in, And he held all in his hand an auger sharp and thin, And he swam until he came to the Spanish ga-!a-lin, As she lay by the Low-lands low.
“ He bored with the auger, he bored once and twice, Anri some were playing cards, and some were playing dice; When the water flowed in it dazzled their eyes, And she sank by the Low-lands low.
“ So the cabin-boy did swim all to the larboard side, Saying, ‘Captain, take me in—I am drifting with the tide!’ ‘I will shoot! I will kill you!’ the cruel Captain cried;
* You may sink by the Low-lands low.’
“ Then the cabin-boy did swim all the starboard side, Saying, ‘Messmates, take me in—I am drifting with the tide!’ Then they laid him on the deck, and he closed his eyes and died As they sailed by the Low-lands low.
“They sewed his body up, all in an old cow’s hide,
And they cast the gallant cabin-boy over the ship's side,
And left him, without more ado, a-drifting with the tide. And to sink by the Low-lands low,”
Digitized by LnOOQle
“THE GOLDEN VANITY" AND “ADMIRAL BENBOW."
731
To turn to a subject more historical Towards the elose of his reign, it had been the purpose of King William III. to seize Cartagena, one of the principal centres of the Spanish American trade in the Western Hemisphere; and to that end, in September, 1701, six months before his death, he dispatched there a squadron under that fine old sea-dog, Admiral Benbow. Benbow fell in with a French squadron, under Du Casse, sent to supply and strengthen the place, and brought it to action north of Cartagena. But, though he was superior in force, the treason of several of his captains, who kept out of action, defeated the plucky old warrior’s purpose, and after fighting till his ship was helpless, and himself	had received a	mortal	wound,	he was forced
to let the French escape, and	Cartagena	was	saved.	Before	his death he
received a letter from the French Commodore. “Sir,” wrote Du Casse, “I had little hopes, on Monday last, but to have supped in your cabin; but it pleased God to order it otherwise. I	am thankful	for it	As for those
cowardly captains who deserted	you, hang	them	up, for, by----, they deserve
it' ” And hanged two of them were. The action was celebrated in the following fine doggerel:—
“ADMIRAL BENBOW.
“ Come, all yo sailors bold, Lend an ear, lend an ear; Come, all ye sailors bold. Lend an ear. It’s of our Admiral's fame— ‘Brave Benbow,’ call’d by name— . How be fought upon tho main, You shall hear, you shall hear.
“ Brave Benbow he set sail For to tight, for to fight; Brave Benbow he set sail For to light.
Brave Benbow he act sail,
With a fine and pleasant gale, But his captains they turn’d tail In a fright, in a fright
“ Says Kirby unto Hood, ‘I wilt run, I will run;’ Says Kirby unto Hood, ‘I will run.
I value not disgrace,
Nor the losing of my place;
My enemies I’ll not face
With a gun, with a gun.’
“ Twas the Ruby and Noah’a Ark
Taught the French, taught tho French ;
Twas the Ruby and Jtouk’t Ark Taught the Frendu
And there was ten in all,
Poor souls ! they fought them all.
They valued them not at all, Nor their noise, nor their noise.
Digitized byVrOOQlC
732
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
“ Unfortunate it was,
By chain shot, by chain shot, Unfortunate it was,
By chain shot ;
Our Admiral lost his legs.
Unto his men he begs:
* Fight on, brave boys !' he says. ‘ ’Tis my lot, 'tis my lot! ’”
lOckpit, and while the surgeon was engaged in the amputation a lieutenant expressed sympathy with the Admiral for thus losing his leg. 11 My lad,” said Benbow, “I’m sorry for it, too; .but I had rather lose them both than see this dishonour brought upon the English nation. But, do ye hear, if another shot should take me off, behave like brave men and fight it out.”
“ While the surgeon dress’d his wound How he cried, how he cried !
While the surgeon dress’d his wound How he cried !
‘ Let my cradle now in haste On the quarter-deck be plac’d, That my enemies I may face Till I’m dead, till I’m dead!’”
He was carried down to the
ADMIHAL IS ENDOW.
(After the Fainting by Sir (Joffrey Kntller, R.A.)
A somewhat similar story is told of old Admiral Gayton. He was home-
ward bound in the Antelope, and lying sick to death below. The Antelope was battered, crazy, and undermanned. Suddenly a large man-of-war was sighted, and preparations were made at once to receive the enemy. Gayton, roused by the noise overhead, crawled on deck, and addressed his men thus: “ Now then, boys, behave like Englishmen. I can’t stand by you; but I’ll sit and see you fight as long as you please.” The stranger luckily proved to be a British cruiser.
This, again, recalls a story of old “ Dreadnaught ” Boscawen. When captain of the Glory frigate, and cruising off Madeira, he was set upon by two Spanish ships and one Frenchman, the latter alone being of more than equal force. It was late in the evening, and Boscawen was taking a nap, when his lieutenant ran down with a long face, told the news, and asked, " What shall we do I ” “ Do ! ” answered Boscawen, sitting up and rubbing his eyes. “Do! Oh, fight ’em, to be sure,” and stalked up on deck in his shirt only. In this light and airy costume he fought the ship for near upon two glasses, when the enemy, finding they must be taken if they continued the fight, drew off under cover of the darkness.
Digitized by GOOQle
"THE HOLD DEyj^MIN."
733
Another ballad tells of Benbow’s famous action in a somewhat different
metre:—
“ Oh, we drew up our squadron In a very nice line,
And we fought them courageously For near four hours' time;
“ ‘ THEY FOUGHT THEM ALL ’ ” (p. 731X
But the day being spent, And the night coming on, Oh, we let them alone
Until the next morn."
But Jack could be satirical in his ballads when he chose, as witness the song of the Bold Benjamin:—
“ Captain Edwards is gone to sea,
High, sir! ho, sir!
With a jovial ship's company, On board the Bold Benjamin, O.
Digitized by LnOOQie
734
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
“ He carried out five hundred men, High, sir ! ho, sir 1
And brought home but thirty-oue
On board the Bold Benjamin, 0.”
Sometimes he spoke out even more openly, as in a song upon the unfortunate Admiral Byng, with a refrain :—-
“Swing, swing, O rare Admiral Byng!”
Later on, Dibdin provided the British seaman with a windlass chanty, in which, under pretence of “giving and taking a joke,” he could indulge in pretty general abuse of all the ship’s company but himself The following may serve as a specimen;—
“ The Gunner’s a deuce of a bubber, The Carfindo can't fish a mast, The Surgeon’s a lazy land lubber. The Master can't steer if he’s ast;
The Lieutenants conceit are all wrapp’d in,
The Mates scarcely merit their flip,
Nor is there a swab, but the Captain, Knows the stem from the stern of a ship.
With a will-ho, then, pul] away, jolly boys,” etc., etc.
As a somewhat more amiable example of the ditties of the old navy, let us take the song of “ Hammer and Tongs ” from Captain Marryat’s “ Snarleyow,” from which we have before quoted:—•
“ The Captain stood on the carronade: ‘First lieutenant,’ says he,
1	Send all my merry men aft lie re, for they must list to me.
I haven’t the gift of the gab, my sons, because I’m bred to the sea;
That ship there is a Frenchman, who means to fight with we.
And odds, bobs, hammer and tongs, long as I’ve been to sea,
I’ve fought 'gainst every odds, but I’ve gained the victory ! ’
‘“That ship there is a Frenchman, and if we don’t take she, ’Till a thousand bullets to one that she will capture we.
I haven’t the gift of the gab, my hoys, so each man to his gun ;
If she’s not mine in half an hour, I’ll flog each mother’s son.
For odds, bobs, hammer and tongs, long as I’ve been to sea, I’ve fought ’gainst every odds, and I've gained the victory 1 ’
“ We fought for twenty minutes, when the Frenchmen had enough ;
‘ I little thought,’ said he, ‘ that your men were of such stuff.' .
Our Captain took the Frenchman’s sword, a low bow made to he—
‘I haven’t the gift of the gab, monsieur, but polite I wish to be.
And odds, bobs, hammer and tongs, long as I've been to sea, I’ve fought ’gainst every odds, and I’ve gained the victory!’
“Our Captain sent for all of ns : ‘My merry men,' said he,
‘I haven’t the gift of the gab, my lads, but yet I thankful be;
You’ve done your duty handsomely, each man stood to his gun;
If you hadn’t, yon villains, as sure as day, I’d have flogged each mother’s son.
For odds, bobs, hammer and tongs, as long as I’m at sea, I’ll fight ’gainst every odds, and I’ll gain the victory!’”
In spirit, the above bears some resemblance to Nelson's famous message to Collingwood, dated “ Victory, 25th June, 1805.-—May God bless you and
Digitized byVrOOQlC
A BALLAD OF FIVE FRIGATES.
735
send you alongside the Santisima Trinidad." In style, it may better be compared with the once popular song of the " Old Commodore ’’:—
“ That's the old Commodore,
The rum old Commodore,
The goaty old Commodore, he 1
Why, the bullets and the gout Have so knock’d his hull about. That he’ll never more be fit for sea,”
But the characteristic note of all these naval ballads is their artlessness combincd with what we may call their economy of sentiment. In this they differ strikingly from tho very sentimental lyrics in which the Jack Tar was supposed to address his Poll or his Nancy. Before dealing with this class of lyric, we will quote two old ballads, separated by a great distance of time, but curiously alike in their naivete and directness. The first is taken from the Roxburghe collection, and tells—
“ . . , of five sail of frigates
Bound to Malago
For to fight the proud Spaniards, Our orders were so.
“ There was the Henry and Ruby,
And the Antelope also.
The (Jreyhmind and the Bryan, For fire-ships must go.
But so bravely we weigh’d
And played our parts.
That we made the proud Spaniards
To quake in their hearts.
“When we came to an anchor
So nigh to the Mold,
‘Methinks you proud English
Do grow very bold I ’
But we came to an anchor
So near to the town,
That some of the churches
We soon batter’d down.
“They hung out their flag of truce.
For to know our intent,
'.	And they sent out their long-boats	'
To know what we meant.
But tlie Captain he answered Them bravely, it was so, ‘For to bunt all your shipping Before we did go.’
“1 For to burn ail our shipping ?
You must us excuse ;
Tis not for five sail of frigates
Shall make us to muse.’
But we burnt all their shipping,
And their sailors also,
And we left in the city
Full many a widow.
Digitized by
Google
736
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
/'Ait(o. IF. MoiIA. P^uioKtA.
PLYMOUTH ROE AND CITADEL, FROM THE SOUND.
‘“Come, then,’ says our Captain, ‘Let's fire at the church.' And down came their belfry. Which grieved them much ;
And down came the steeple, Which standeth so high, And forced all the people To the nunnery to fly. •	•	♦	*
“At length being forced They thought it most fit Unto the Englishmen For to submit;
And so a conclusion At last we did make Upon such conditions As was fit to take.”
Our second example is called—
“THE LOXDOX MAN-OF-WAR.
“ The fourteenth day of August in Plymouth Sound we lay, On board the Coni mon Order we could no longer stay;
As on the coast of Ireland, our orders did run so,
It was to cruise, but ne'er refuse, when wc met with our proud foe.
“ We had not sailed many leagues before we did espy
A lofty sail to the windward come bearing flown so nigh ;
They hailed us in French, my boys, and ask’d from whence we came;
Our answer was, ‘From Liverpool, and the London is our name.’
‘ ‘ If you’re the London man-of-war, as I suppose you be, We are the Royd Drlnmitn/ne, that you shall quickly see.’
* 'Tis, boys ; haul up your courses ! and let your ship lay to, Your men so stout, your boats let out, or else we will sink you.
Digitized by Tooele
“THE LONDON MAN-OF-WAR.”
737
“ The first broadside we gave them we struck them with such wonder, Their lofty yards and topmasts came rattling down like thunder.
* That’s very well! that's very well 1 ’ our Captain he did say.
‘That’s very well,’ says our Commodore; ‘we’ll show them British play!’
“ The next broadside we gave to them, so hot our shot did fly, We shot away their ensign-staff, and down their colours lie: ‘ That’s very well! that’s very well! ’ our Captain he did say , ‘Come, draw your swords and pistols load, for we’ll board without delay.’
“ So now we’ve taken the Delamarqw, and safe in Plymouth Sound, But when we do cast anchor we’ll fire our guns all round ;
Here’s a health unto the Captain, and all such warlike souls— To him let’s drink, but never shrink, over full-flowing bowls."
We come now to quite a different class of ditty—the Working Song, or Chanty. And of this the first thing to be observed is that it belongs peculiarly to the Merchant Service. The men of the Royal Navy go about their work in absolute silence, if for no other reason than that a simultaneous bawling from five hundred or more hoarse throats would be found intolerable to the ear. An old wooden ship of war would shake out her canvas in a breath, almost as if one man were doing it with a single turn of the hand. She had her forecastle men, her foretop men (the dandies of the ship), her maintop men, her quarter-deck men, her waisters—not to mention that curiously- named gang, the “ working idlers,” viz. the ship’s armourer, sail - maker, tailor,
“ WOULD SHAKE OUT HBR CANVAS " (p. 737),
47
Digitized by LnOOQle
738
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
cooper, tinsmith, butcher, and men of other handy professions, who worked the pump while the decks were being washed, and performed similar odd jobs. AU these men would be mustered at their stations, waiting the word of command; and at the officer’s voice—supposing the frigate to be getting under weigh—yards would be hoisted, sails would flutter out and be sheeted home, and the anchor smartly tripped, as though the vessel were a living creature, moving by her own will
But a merchant ship is always undermanned. Each man of her crew is expected to do the work of two, and, at a pinch, of three or four. There are no foretop men or maintop men on board of her. The merchant seaman snatches at the first rope it is necessary to haul on, and when that is belayed he runs to the next. Here, then, is the secret of the usefulness of the working song. It helps the men to keep time, so that every ounce-weight of all the men as they pull or heave shah be applied at exactly the same moment. “ I have known,” says Mr. Russell, “ seamen at work on some job that required a deal of heavy and sustained pulling to labour as if all heart had gone out of them, whilst one of the gang tried song after song, the mate meanwhile standing by and encouraging them with the familiar official rhetoric, till on a sudden an air has been struck up that acted as if by magic. The men not only found their own strength—every fellow became as good as two. This, I believe, will be the experience of most merchant sailors.
“ There are tunes to suit every kind of work on board ship: short, cheerful melodies for jobs soon accomplished, or over which a captain would not allow time to be wasted in singing (for I am bound to say that the disposition of a sailor is to make a very great deal of song go to the smallest possible amount of pull), such as hauling out a bowline, mast-heading one of the lighter yards, or boarding a tack. Other working choruses, again, are as long as a ship’s cable. These are sung at the capstan or at the windlass, when the intervals between the starting of the solo and the coming in of the chorus do not hinder the work an instant. It would be interesting to know when and by whom the working song was first introduced into the British Merchant Service. In old books of voyages no reference whatever is made to it. There is not a sentence in the collections from Hakluyt down to Burney to indicate that when the early sailors pushed at handspikes or dragged upon the rigging they animated their labour with songs and choruses. I have some acquaintance with the volumes of Shelvocke, Funnell, and other marine writers of the lost century; but, though many of them, such as Ringrose, Dampier, Cooke, Snelgrave, and particularly Woodes Rogers, enter very closely into the details of the shipboard work of their time, they are to a man silent on this question of singing. It is for this reason that I would attribute the origin of the practice to the Americans. If most of the forecastle melodies still current at sea be not the composition of Yankees, the words, at all events, are sufficiently tinctured by American sentiment to render my
Digitized by GOOQle
CHANTIES.
739
conjecture plausible. The titles of many of these working songs have a strong flavour of Boston and New York about them. ‘ Across the Western Ocean/ * The Plains of Mexico/ ' Run, Let the Bulljine Run! ’ ‘ Bound to the Rio Grande’: these and many more, which I cannot immediately recollect, betray to my mind a trans-Atlantic inspiration. ‘ Heave to the Girls/ ’ Cheerly, Men/ ' A Dandy Ship and a Dandy Crew/ ‘ Tally hi ho 1 You Know/ * Hurrah! Hurrah I My Hearty Bullies/ and scores more of a like kind, all of them working songs, never to be heard off the decks of a ship, are racy in air and words of the soil of the States.”*
In these chanties the time is everything and the words go for very little, as a few examples will convince the reader :—
1.	Capstan Songs.—Example ; “ Away for Rio ”—
Chanty. Charus. Chanty. Chorus.	Oh, the anchor is weigh’d, and the sails they are set. Away! Rio! The maids that we’re leaving we’ll never forget! For we're bound to Rio Grande! And away—Rio 1 Aye—Rio 1 Sing fare-ye-we!l, my bonny young girl, We’re bound for Rio Grande !
Chanty. Chorus. Chanty. Chorus.	So man the good capstan and run it around I Away—Rio! We’ll heave up the anchor to this jolly sound. For we’re bound to Rio Grande! And away—Rio! (etc.)
and so on.
2.	Setting Sail Songs.—Example: “Haul the Bow-lin'”—
“ Haul on the bow-lin’, the fore and maintop bow-lin’, Haul on the bow-lin’, the bow-lin’ haul!
“ Haul on the bow-lin’, the packet is a-rolling I Haul on the bow-lin’, the bow lin’ haul!
“ Haul on the bow lin’, the skipper he’s a growling, Haul on the bow-lin/ the bow-lin’ haul 1
•‘ Haul on the bow-lin’, to London we are going. Haul on the bow-lin’, the bow-lin’ haul!
“ Haul on the bow-lin’, the good ship is a-bowling, Haul on the bow-lin’, the bow-lin’ haul 1 ”
3.	Song for Furling Sail, or Bunting-up Songs.—Example: “ Paddy Doyle’s Boots”—
“ Yeo, aye, and we’ll haul, aye, To pay Paddy Doyle for his boots ; We’ll tauten the bunt and we’ll furl, aye, And pay Paddy Doyle for his boots ...”
* “The Mystery of the Ocean Star," etc. By W. Chirk Russell. London : Chatto & Wiudaa 1801.
Digitized by
Google
740
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
4.	Pumping Songs.—Example: "Ono More Day for Johnnie"—
“ Only one more day for Johnnie,
One more day!	. ,
Oh, rock and roll me over, Only one more day! ”
5.	Songs on Getting into Port.—Example: "Leave her, Johnnie”—
“ I thought I heard the skipper say,
‘Leave her, Johnnie, leave her!
To-morrow you will get your pay, It’s time for us to leave her.’ . , *
~The tunes, however, are often spirited, and sometimes remarkably weird. Of this latter quality we may give two specimens. The first is the famous “ Homeward Bound ” chanty, sung while the anchor is being heaved in a foreign port. The peculiarity of this melody—as musicians will observe—is its ending on the “dominant” note.
The tune of " Lowlands ” is almost as curious, and even more attractive.
Chanty.
Chorus.
But even the words of these chanties in some cases reach a very respectable level There is dignity, for instance, as well as quaintness in the dirge of “ Old Storm Along ”:—
Digitized by GOOQle
"SUNG AT THE CAPSTAN (;’■ 'MX
Digitized by LnOOQle
742
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
“ Storm ie’s gone, the good old man,	'
To my aye, Storm along!	,
Oh, Stormie’s gone, that good old man ;	'
Aye, aye, aye, Mister Storm along !
“ They dug hia grave with a silver spade; His shroud of finest silk was made,
“ They lowered him with a golden chain, Their eyes all dim with more than rain.
“ He was a sailor bold and true, A good old skipper to his crew.
“ He lies low in an earthen bed;
Our hearts are sore, our eyes are red,
“ He’s moored at last, and furled his sail; No danger now from wreck or gale.
“ Old Storm has heard an angel call, To my aye, Storm along!
So sing his dirge now, one and all, Aye, aye, aye, Mister Storm along 1 ”
The words of “ Homo, Dearie, Home,” too, are taking enough in the original; but Mr. Henley, in his “ Book of Verses ” (London: David Nutt), has recast them into one of the prettiest sea-songs in the language —
“ O Falmouth is a fine town, with ships in the bay, And I wish from my heart it’s there I was to-day; I wish from my heart I was far away from here, Sitting in my parlour and talking to my dear. • For it’s home, dearie, home—it’s home I want to be.
'	Our topsails are hoisted, and well away to sea.
O the oak and the ash and the bonnie birken tree, They’re all growing green in the old countree.
“ In Baltimore a-walking a lady I did meet, With her babe on her arm as she camo down the street; And I thought how I sailed, and the cradle standing ready For the pretty little babe that has never seen its daddie.
And it’s home, dearie, home 1 (etc.)
“ O, if it be a lass, she shall wear a golden ring;	•
And if it be a lad, he shall fight for his king ;
With his dirk and his hat and his little jacket blue, He shall walk the quarter-deck, as his daddy used to do.
And it’s home, dearie, home 1 (etc.)
“ O, there’s a wind n-blowing, a-blowing from the west, And that of all the winds is the one I like the best ; For it blows at our backs and it shakes our pennon free, And it soon will blow us' home to the old countree.
For it’s home, dearie, home—it’s home I want to be.
One topsails are hoisted, and we’ll away to sea.
O the oak and tho ash and the bonnie birken tree, They’re all growing green in the old countree.”
In turning to the songs which Dibdin and his followers have written for Jock, we come upon stuff of a very different quality. Of Charles Dibdin himself (1745-1814) it must be confessed that his nautical lyrics achieved
Digitized by^OOQlC
DIBDIN’S SONGS.
743
great popularity, and were smiled upon by no less a statesman than Pitt. Some of them, such as “ Poor Jack,” " The Greenwich Pensioner ” (“ Twas in tho Good Ship Rover,”), "The Sailor’s Journal” ("'Twas Post-meridian, Half-past Four”), and, above all, the famous “Tom Bowling," have lived and will probably continue to live. Let us give the latter here, as being its author's masterpiece:—
“TOM BOWLING.
*' Here, a sheer hulk, lies poor Tom Bowling, The darling of our crew;
No more he’ll hear the tempest howling, For Death has broach’d him to.
His form was of the manliest beauty, His heart was kind and soft;
Faithful below he did his duty. But now he’s gone aloft.
“ Tom never from his word departed, His virtues were so rare,
His friends were many and true-hearted, His Poll was kind and fair;
And then he’d sing so blithe and jolly. Ah ! many's the time and oft!
But mirth is turn’d to melancholy, For Tom is gone aloft.
“ Yet shall poor Tom find pleasant weather, When He, who all commands, Shall give, to call life’s crew together, The word to pipe al! hands.
Thus Death, who kings and tars despatches,	.
In vain Tom’s life has doff’d,
For, though his body’s under hatches, His soul has gone aloft”
But, as a rule, Dibdin’s verse is rough, his sentiment affected, his nautical knowledge extremely slender (as far as can be told, he was never' at sea in his life), and his picture of Jack is almost demonstrably a vulgar lampoon. Can anyone believe that the Empire was won by the sort of drunken and stupid mountebank who pervades the sea songs of that period, bawling for grog or “swizzy,” talking rubbish about Poll, Sue, and Nancy, and even greater rubbish about marlingspikes and maintop-braces ? Still less could Trafalgar have been won by the sentimental puppet which passes for the British sailor in Dibdin’s more “refined” verse: a pink and white creature, who sits astride the " pendant yard ” when he ought to be working, and alternately contemplates his Nancy's features in a locket and casts sheep’s eyes at the receding shore. The reader shall have him in both aspects as portrayed by Dibdin’s pen:—
1.	The Realistic—
“ If ever a sailor was fond of good sport
'Mongst the girls, why, that sailor was I;
Of all sizes and sorts, I’d a wife at each port;
But when that I saw’d Polly Ply,
Digitized by
Google
744
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
I hail’d her my lovely and giv'd her a kiss, And swore to bring up once for all,
And from that time Black Barnaby spliced us to this, I’ve been constant and true to my Poll.”
2. The Quasi-poetical—
“ Jack Ratlin was the ablest seaman, None like him could hand, reef, and steer; No dangerous toil but he’d encounter
With skill, and in
CHA 11 LES D I B D 1 N . (from a Print.)
contempt of fear.
In fight a lion; the battle ended, Meek as a bleating lamb he’d prove :
Thus Jack had manners, courage, merit. Yet did he sigh—and all for love!
“ The song, the jest, the flowing liquor, For none of these had Jack regard;
He, while his messmates were carousing, High sitting on the pendant-yard,
Would think upon his fair one’s beauties, Swear never from such charms to rove;
That truly he’d adore them living, And, dying, sigh—to end his love!
“ The same express the crew commanded. Once more to view their native land,
Among the rest brought Jack some tidings— Would it had been his love’s fair hand!
Oh fate ! her death defaced the letter!
Instant his pulse forgot to move;
With quivering lips, and eyes uplifted, He heaved a sigh—and died for love!”
Dibdin could be amazingly
nautical when he chose. Take
“ Poor Jack,” one of his most famous songs;—
“ Go patter to lubbers and swabs, d’ye see,
’Bout danger, and fear, and the like ;
A tight-water boat and good sea-room give me,
And it ain’t to a little I’ll strike :
Though the tempest top-gallant masts smack smooth should smite,
And shiver each sj>1 inter of wood,
Clear the wreck, stow the yards, and bouze everything tight,
And under reef d fore sail we’ll scud :
Avast ! nor don’t think me a milksop so soft
To be taken for trifles aback ;
For, they say, there's a Providence sits up aloft, To keep watch for the life of poor Jack."
A critic of poetry may pass the above on the ground that, whatever else it may be, it is highly nautical: a practical seaman may pass it on the ground that, whatever else it may be, it is highly poetical As a matter of fact, the line—
“ Though the tempest top gallant masts smack smooth should smite,”
is very bad poetry, and as a description of a marine disaster it is impossible.
Digitized by LnOOQle
A FORECASTLE CONCERT
745
Topgallant-masts do not go “ smack smooth.” Again, in his famous “ ’Twas in the Good Ship Hover," we have the following description of the vessel’s
course:—
“ That time bound straight to Portugal, Right fore and aft we bore ;
But when we made Ca|e Ortugal, A gale blew off the shore.”
•• MWUSO FOR OROO ” (p. 713).
Tliis sounds very plausible, but, as a matter of fact, “right fore and aft” is no description at all of a vessel’s course, unless the poet wished to guard his land-keeping readers from the supposition that the good ship Rover moved, like a crab, in the direction of her broadside!
Songs of this order have always been popular—on shore. But in real life Jack is no fonder than other men of singing about his profession. If you attend a forecastle concert, you may, indeed, hear one or two “ salt ” songs, such as " Eight Bells,” “ Salt Horse,” “ The Dead Horse,” “ The Ox-eyed Man,” “ The Black Ball Line,” “ Farewell and Adieu to You, Fair Spanish
Digitized by GOOQle
746	THE STORY OF THE SEA.
Ladies," or “Blow the Man Down." But. the majority of their ditties are the sentimental and comic produce of the Music HalL You are not to expect “ Blow high, blow low, let tempests tear The main-mast by the board ” from the mouth of an able seaman. He will more probably put on a languishing air and give you “ Dream Faces,” or inform you “ I loves a game of croquet,” or describe himself as—-
“ Leaning on a bal-co-ny,
■	Smoking a cigar,
Talking to a pretty girl,
’Eedless of mamma ! ’’
—or tell how—
“ As I walk along the Bois de Boulong,
With an indejwndent air, The ladies all declare, ‘He must be a millionaire!’”
—and how he " winks the other eye ” as “ the man who broke the bank at Monte Carlo’’’
There is, however, one story which, cast in all kinds of metros and set to all manner of tunes, seems to have been a favourite with British seamen from time immemorial It deals with the adventures of a simple ploughboy, who falls in love with a lady above him in rank. Her parents, learning of his presumption, get him kidnapped, or “ pressed,” away to sea. The bereaved young lady thereupon dresses herself in man’s attire, follows him to the ship, ransoms him from the captain, carries him on shore, and marries him. One of the oldest known versions of the song runs as follows:—
“ 0 the Ploughboy was a-p]oughing
With his horses on the plain,
And was singing of a song as on went he :
‘Since that I have fall’n in love,
If the parents disapprove,
Tia the first thing that will send me to the sea.’
“ When the parents came to know
That their daughter loved him so. Then they sent a gang, and pressed him for the sea.
And they made of him a tar,
To be slain in cruel war. Of the simple Ploughboy singing on the lea.
“ The maiden sore did grieve, >
And, without, a word of leave,
From her fathers house she fled secretlie,
In male attire dress’d,
With a star upon her breast.
All to seek her simple Plough boy on the sea.
“Then she went o’er hill and plain,
And she walked in wind and raiu,
Till she came to the brink of the blue sea,
Saying. ‘I am forces I to rove,
For the loss of my true love,
Who is but a simple Ploughboy from the lea.’
Digitized by LnOOQle
"IN CAWSAND BAY LYING."
747
“ Now the first she did behold, O it was a sailor bold.
‘Have you seen my simple Ploughboy?’ then said she. ‘They have press’d him to the fleet. Sent him tossing on the deep,
Who is but a simple Ploughboy from the lea.’
“ Then site went to the Captain, And to him she made complain :
1	0, a silly Plough boy’s run away from me ! ’ Then the Captain smiled and said, ‘Why, sir! surely you’re a maid I
So the Ploughboy I will render up to thee.’
“ Then she pulp'd out a store
Of five hundred crowns and more, And she strewed them on the deck, did she.
Then she took him by the hand. And she rowed him to the land, Where she wed the simple Ploughboy back from sea.’
A later version is called:—■
“IN CAWSAND BAY LYING.
“In Cawsand Bay lying, with the Blue Peter flying,
And al! hands on deck for the anchor to weigh,
When off came a lady, as fresh as a daisy, And modestly hailing, the damsel did say—
“‘Ship ahoy ! bear a hand there ! I want a young man there !
So heave us a man-rope, or send him to me.
His name’s Henry Grady, and I am a lady, Arrived to prevent him from going to sea.’
“ Now the Captain, his honour, when he looked upon her, He ran down the side for to hand her on board.
Cried he with emotion, ‘ What son of the ocean Can thus be looked after by Helena Ford ? ’
“Then the lady made answer, ‘That there is a man, sir, I’ll make him as free as a duke or a lord.’
‘ Oh, no I ’ says the Capp’en ; ‘ that can’t very well happen.
I’ve got sailing orders—you, sir, stop on board.’
“But up spoke the lady. ‘Don’t you mind him, Hal Grady;
He once was your Capp’en, but now you’re at large ;
You shan’t stop on board her, for all that chap’s order!1 Then out from her bosom she drew his discharge.
“Said the Captain, ‘I’m bang’d now, you’re cool, and I’m banged now.’ Said Ha), ‘ Here, old Weatherface, take all my clothes.’
And ashore then he steered her ; the lads they all cheer’d her. But tho Captain was jealous, and looked down his nose !
“Then she got a shore tailor to rig up her sailor
In white nankeen trousers and long blue tailed-coat;
And he looked like a squire, for all to admire, With a dimity handkercher tied round his throat
Digitized by
Google
748
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
“ They’d a house that was greater than any first-rater, With footmen in livery handing the drink,
And a garden to go in, where flowers were blowing— The buttercup, daisy, the lily, the pink,
"And he got edication befitting his station. For we all of us know we’re not too old to lam ;
And his messmates they found him, his little ones round him, All chips of the old block from the stem to the starn.”
“ A FORECASTLE CONCERT ” {p, 715).
A variant, in which the young hero fares less happily, is one of the most popular of all sea songs:—
“ There was a gay young farmer, Who lived on Salisbury Plain;
He loved a rich knight’s daughter dear, And she lov’d him again.
The knight he was distressed That they should sweethearts be;
So he had the farmer ‘pressed,’ And sent him off to sea, Singing ‘Rule, Britannia,’ etc.
Digitized by GOOgle
“RULE, BRITANNIA.”
749
“ Twas on the deep Atlantic,
'Midst Equinoctial gales, This young farmer fell overboard
Among the sharks and whales ;
He disappear’d so quickly,
So head-long down he went,
That he went out of eight like a streak of light, To the bottom of the deep blue sea-
Singing ‘Rule, Britannia,’ etc.
“ We lowered a boat to find him— We thought to see his corse ;
When up to the top he came with a bang,
And saying in a voice so hoarse,
* My comrades and my messmates,
Oh, do not weep for me, For I’m married to a mer-ma-aid
At the bottom of the deep blue sea'— Singing, ‘ Rule, Britannia,’ etc.
•	•	•	•	*
“ The wind was fair, the sails set,
The ship was running free,
When we all went to the Captain i»ld
And told him what we did see;
He went unto the ship’s side,
And loudly bellowed he :
‘ Be happy as you can, my man, At the bottom of the deep blue sea!’
Singing 1 Rule, Britannia,’" etc.
Digitized by Google
CHAPTER XXXII.
A GLOSSARY OF NAUTICAL TERMS.
Principal Parts of a Ship—Fittings of a Ship—Maste and Various Parts of a Mast—Yards and Sails— Standing Rigging—Running Rigging—Miscellaneous Terms.
I	.—Principal Parts of a Ship.
J SHIP is divided into fore, midship, and after parts.
-£*- The bow is the foremost end ; the waist, or midship, is the middle part of her length; and the stem is the aftermost end. The starboard side is the right-hand side; and the larboard, or port, side the left-hand side; as you look forward.
Keel—is the main timber running lengthways at the lowest part of the ship, and forming the foundation for the side timbers.
Stein—a timber rising from the forepart of the keel and forming the bow.
Stern-post—a timber rising from the afterpart Keelson—an internal keel, and holding the bottom Ribs—timbers rising from the sides of a ship.
of the keel and forming the stern, laid lengthways above the main keel, timbers in their place.
the keel and rounding out to form
Knight heads—the two foremost of these timbers, rising one on each side of the stem.
Garboard strokes—the lowest outside planking, next to the keel,
running fore and aft. Bends—the strongest outside and extending from below the water-line Counter—the afterpart of the bends, the curve Quarter—that part of a ship's side which lies
planking, above the garboard strokes, up to the lower-deck ports.
of the stern.
between her waist and lier counter.
It begins just aft of the main chains, and is ended by the “ quarter-pieces at the side of the stern.
Run—the narrowing of a ship’s afterpart below the water.
Beams—horizontal timbers laid across the ship, holding her two sides together, and supporting the decks.
Shelf piece—runs round the ship inside for the beams to rest upon. The beams are fastened to this and to the ship’s side by pieces of iron called knees.
Carlings—smaller timbers running fore and aft and tying the beams together, thus distributing the strain of the masts, etc.
Partners—frames of timber fitted into the deck, to strengthen it around the masts, capstans, etc.
Digitized by LnOOQle
r
GLOSSARY.
751
Stanchions—pillars supporting a beam.
Transoms—the beams
Is)
STEAN OF SHIP, BHUWXNG TMAX8OM.
1. Upper deck transom; 9, Helm port tiiUMDi; 3. Whig pntUrai?
•out; 4. TrwMniji; 5, Rudder;
tJ. Ktorn |»#t; 7. Aide counter t>imi<T; s. Quarter dock ;U. Rwib* wg; 10. TdrmiL
nearest the stern-post, strengthening the ship’s afterpart. Tafrail—the upper part of the stern-timbers.
Rudder—is hung upon the stern-post, and steers the ship.
Tiller—a handle or lever fitted into the head of the rudder, to turn it at will.
Wkeel—a wheel with spokes extending beyond its circumference, and having its axle connected with the rudder-ropes. The helmsman turning the wheel by these spokes has greater power over the rudder than he would have with an ordinary tiller.
Helm—a general term for all the ship’s steering-apparatus.
Treenails—wooden bolts, fastening the planks to the libs and beams.
Seams—the interstices between the planks.
Caulking—filling up these seams by driving in oakum. The
oakum is driven in with mallets, and the seam is then payed with pitch or marine glue.
II.—Fittings of a Skip .
Anchors—A large ship will have six anchors—t.e. best bower and small bower stowed
forward near the bows ; the best bower being the anchor on the starboard bow, the small bower that on the port bow ; two sheet anchors, of the same size and weight as the bowers; the stream anchor, a smaller one; and hedge anchor, the smallest of all.
Parts of an Anclun— A—the ring. B—the stock. C—the shank.
DD—the arms.
Cable—a large rope, or chain to the anchor. A cable's yards.
E—the crown. F—the fluke. G—the bill.
by which the ship is secured
length is 120 fathoms, or 240
ANCHOR.
Hawse-holes—holes in the bows of a ship, for the cables to pass through, are plugs fitted in these holes to prevent any water washing inboard, are kept in place by small shutters or bucklers.
Hawse-plugs These plugs
Hawser—a small cable.
Chain-pipes—pipes for leading the cable through as it passes up from the chain-locker, where it is stowed.
DAVIT.
A. Fieb duvit; B rat-head : C Acchur italic
Capstan—n. barrel of wood turning round on a centra for weighing the anchor. The capstan has holes into which the capstan-bars are fitted; and by pushing these round and round the cable is wound up.
Cat-heads—pieces of timber projecting from eacn bow of the ship, on to which the anchors are lifted when they arc heaved up by means of the capstan.
Fish davit—a movable piece of timber for lifting the fluke, or tooth, of the anchor on to the hill-board.
Bill-board—a ledge on the ship’s side to support the fluke of the anchor. The anchor, when thus hitched up, is said to be “ fished.”
Digitized by LnOOQle
?52
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
Compressor—an iron lever at the bottom of the chain-pipe. When hauled upon, it jams the cable and prevents it running out
Riding-bitts—a timber crutch fixed in the forepart of the deck, round which the cable may be hitched and secured,
Hgtchway—m opening in the deck, giving access to the interior of the ship. Coamings-—a raised edging round the hatchways to keep the water from washing down, etc.	.
BITTS.
Gratings^- open coverings for the hatchways.	.
AuZAAsacfe—partitions in the ship.
Scuttles—round holes in the ship’s side for ventilation.
Scuppers—gutters running along each side of the deck. Scupperholes are cut through the ship’s side at intervals, which allow any water on deck to run overboard.
Davits—outriggers projecting from the ship's side for hoisting, lowering, or carrying boats.
Bitts, Keviis, Fife-rails. Cleats, Relaying-pins—are different contrivances for belaying, seizing,	or	making	fast,	different	ropes.
Bollard-heads are	timber	heads allowed to rise above	the	planking of	the ship’s side,
and used for making fast hawsers, etc.
Bumlcin—a	short boom	projecting from each bow,	to	extend	the	clew, or	lower
edge of	the	foresail	to windward. Generally any	short fixed	boom.
Chains, or Channels—platforms projecting outwards from the ship’s side to give a wider spread to the lower rigging. This rigging is secured to wooden blocks, or dead eyes, which in turn are fastened to the ship’s side by iron plates called chain-plates.
Chess-trees—vertical pieces of wood bolted on each side of the ship near the gangway, to confine the clew of the mainsail. The tack passes through a hole near the top, and extends the clew of the sail to windward.
Gooseneck—an outrigger resting against the mast and supporting a boom.
Spider—an outrigger holding a block clear of the ship’s side.
Dead-lights—thick pieces of glass let into the deck to give light to the forecastle, etc.
III.—Masts, and Various Parts of a Mast.
The principal sails of a ship are spread upon three masts and three masts are named the fore, main, and mizzen masts. The main-mast is the middle and largest mast; the fore mast is the furthest forward, and comes next in size; the mizzenmast is the aftermost and smallest mast.
Each of these masts is composed of four pieces, viz.:
1.	The lower masts—the lowest piece of each mast resting on the bottom of the ship.
2.	The top-masts—next above.
3.	The top-gallant masts—above these.
4.	The royal masts—highest of all.
a bowsprit. The
SAILS.
A ship will also carry small subsidiary masts called Trysail masts (see “ Trysail ”), set just abaft her lower masts and connected with them.
The Bowsprit—is a short mast projecting out from the bows.
The Jibboom—is a slighter spar, projecting beyond the bowsprit and supported by it.
The Flying Jibboom—is a yet slighter spar projecting beyond the jibboom and supported by it and by the bowsprit.
Step—is the timber on which the heel or bottom of a mast rests.
Digitized by LnOOQle
GLOSSARY.
753
Head—the upper end of a spar.
Heel—the lower end of a spar.
Housing—ail that part of a mast which is sunk inside the ship.
Hounding—the part from the deck up to where the rigging is placed.
Masi-head—from where the rigging is placed to the top of the mast.	,
Treslletrees—two fore-and-aft pieces of timber, one on each side of the mast, supporting the rigging, the upper masts, and the	•
Crosstrees—two pieces laid on and across the trestletrees to spread the upper rigging and help support the
Top—a platform resting on the lower crosatrees and trestletrees, used for convenience of men working aloft. The upper masts have no tops, but crosstrees only.
Lubbers Hole—a square hole cut in the top through which a man may climb up into the top, if he cannot manage to get up by way of the futtock-shrouds. (See “ Futtock-ahrouds,” and p. 23.)
Cap—on a masthead, a stout block of timber having two holes—a square hole to receive the lower masthead, and a round hole to receive the lower part of the upper
TOP.
mast; thus tying the two masts firmly together. The heel of the upper mast drops through the round hole, and is further secured below with a Fid.
Fid—a bolt passing through the heel of an upper mast and across the trestletrees.
thus supporting the mast in position.
BOOHS.
Jaws—the semi-circular widening at the inner end of a
boom or gaff by which it fits against the mast.
IV.— Yards and Sails.
Sails are either Square or Fore-and-aft.
Yards—large spars that go across the masts and carry the square-sails. One yard is crossed upon each mast, and takes its name from the name of that mast, e.g. “ Fore-topsail yard,” “ Main yard,” “ Mizzen topgallant
yard.” The only exception being the
Cross-jac/c yard—(pronounced "Crojik"), which is the lowest yard on the mizzenmast. It has no sail set below it
Gaff—the spar at the head of a fore-and-aft sail.
Boom—the spar at the foot of a fore-and-aft sail.
Yard-arm—the ends of a yard, where the rigging is placed.
Slings—the middle of a yard, where the rigging is placed; middle of a yard.
Quarter—(of a yard) is the space between the slings and the yard-arm.
Sails—arc named after the mast, stay, or boom on which they are spread, e.g. “foresail," “fore topsail," “fore topgallant sail,” “fore royal,” “flying jib,” “foretopmast staysail.”
Courses—a name used for the foresail, mainsail, and spanker. When a ship takes in all her canvas but these, she is said to be sailing “under courses."
Spanker—A fore-and-aft sail set abaft the mizzenmast, upon a trysail mast and a gaff and boom called the
also a rope supporting the
SPAS FEB OB TRYSAIL.
48
Digitized by LnOOQle
754
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
spanker gaff and spanker boom. It is properly a trysail, which is a fore-and-aft sail set on a trysail mast abaft each lower mast. As a rule it has no boom.
Stayfail—a fore-and-aft sail set upon a stay and named after that stay, e.g. foretopmast staysail.
Studding-sails—(pronounced “ stun’sles ”) are extra sails set outside the square-sails on each side of the ship. They are named after their respective masts.
There are no studding sails on the mizzen-mast, or on either side of the mainsail, or the royals of any mast.
Sprit-sails—obsolete in large ships. The old man-of-war of the 17th century used to carry a small upright mast (“sprit-mast”) stepped in the end of the bowsprit. This little mast had a yard across it, and carried a sprit-sail and sprit-topsaiI (both square).
The “ sprit-sail " used nowadays by l arges and small craft is a sail that sets upon a “ spilt,” or pole running diagonally across the canvas from the foot of the mast to the outer head of the sail.
Spinnakers, large balloon sail, of slight texture, used by yachts in running before the wind.	■
A Cloth—13 a strip of canvas.
Hunts—the middle cloths of a square-sail.
Leech—the side of a sail.
Luff—the weather leech, the side nearest the wind.
C7w*—the two corners at the foot of a square-sail; also the after lower corners of a fore-and-aft sail.
Tack—the fere lower corner of a fore-and-aft sail; also the rope holding the foremost lower corner of a “course;” (See “Courses” above.)
Sheets—the ropes spreading the lower courses of the square-sails (with the single exception of the foremost lower corner of a “course” (see “Tack”), and the after lower corner of a foreand-aft sail.
Peak—the to]) outer corner of any fore-and-aft sail that sets on a gaff; the comer at the extremity of the gaff.
Throat—the top inner coj-ner of a similar sail; the top corner close to the mast.
Halt-rope—the rope sewn round the sail for edging.
Tabling—the doubling of the canvas round the edge of the sail by the bolt-rope.
Cringles—loops of ro[»e worked into the bolt-rope for the reef-earrings, etc.
Earrings-—ropes spliced into the cringles to secure the sail to the yard.
Buntlines—ropes at the foot of the sail, used in reefing or taking in a sail.
Clewlines—ropes attached to the clews or bottom corners of a square-sail, used iu taking it in.
Reef-points—small ropes hanging in lines across a sail, for reefing or shortening canvas.
Roach—the upward curve, or hollow, of the foot of a sail.
Slab—any slack, loosely hanging part of a sail.
V.—Standing Rigging.
. Every spar in a ship must be supported by ropes (of hemp, or wire, or chain) from three different directions.
A Stay—is a rope supporting a mast from forward; the ropes supporting it sideways are either shrouds, backstays, or guys.
Shrouds—these run from the dead-eyes by the ship's side to the tops; and again from the tops to the crosstrees; and support the mast laterally
Digitized by
Google
GLOSSARY.
755
.Backstays—these run from the head of any of tho upper masts right down in one line to the ship's sides, where they are fastened. These support their masts from behind.
Each stay, shroud, backstay, or guy takes its name from the mast it supports, e.g. fore-topmast stay, fore-topmast shrouds, fore-topgallant stay, fore-topgallant shrouds, fore- topgall ant hack stay, jib-guys.
The reason why each mast has more support sideways and aft than it has from forward is, of course, that a mast naturally leans forward from the force of the wind on its sails.	i
The bowsprit is supported downwards by bobslays, and on cither side by shrouds.
The jtbboom, downwards by a martingale and on eitlier side by jib-guys.
The flying jibbooni, downwards by a flying martingale, and on either side by flying-guys.
Since the rigging that supports the jib and flying-jibbooms would not have sufficient spread if led out straight from the ship’s bows, gaffs are inserted between it and the bowsprit, to hold it out at a wider angle.
Gammonings—chains lashed round the bowsprit, holding it down in its bed.
Buttock-shrouds—ropes or chains running out from the masts, below the tops, to the edges of the tops. Used for climbing into the tops. (See p. 23.)
Ratlines—small ropes crossing the shrouds to form ladders.
Jackstay—a rope stretched along the top of a yard, for the sail to be bent to.
Bootrope—a rope festooned across under a yard, or boom, for the men to stand upon.
hatlines.
Stirrups—short ropes holding up the footrope at intervals to the yard or boom, Blemish horse—a short foot-rope banging from the yard-arm.
Lanyard—a small rope securing the end of any part of the rigging.
VI.—Running Rigging.
Halliards—ropes used for hoisting a sail.
Sheets—ropes used for spreading the foot of a sail. (See above, “ Yards and Sails.’) Jacks—(see above, “ Yards and Sails ”).
Lifts—ropes supporting the yards, and used to hoist or lower them.
Braces—ropes running to the yard-arms, used for pulling the yards into such a position that the sails may catch most wind.
Buntlines, Clewlines—(see above, “Yards and Sails").
Clewgarnels—pull the lower corners of a sail up to the quarter of its own yard. (For clew and quarter see above, “ Yards and Sails,”) Used in taking in the sail.
Bowlines—ro\>os made fast to the leeches of a sail, and used to pull the weather-side forward, thus tautening and flattening sail against the wind.
Brails—ropes used for taking in a spanker or trysail.
Baton hauls—haul down a jib or staysail.
Oulhaul—-hauls a fore-and-aft sail (such as a spanker or trysail) out to the end of its boom or gaff.
Cat—-the tackle for hoisting up the anchor.
Whip—a. line rove through a single block.	•
VII.—Miscellaneous Terms.
(In alphabetical order.)
Aback—a sail is “taken aback” when the wind presses on its forward, instead of its hinder, surface.
Digitized by
Google
756
THE STORY OF THE SEA.
Abaft—see “Aft” On the aft or hinder side of any given point; as, abaft the mainmast . Abeam—the point at right angles with a ship's mainmast; hence “abaft the beam” is a position between the direct line abeam and the stern; and before the beam is between the beam end the bows.
Aboard—on board in a ship. “To go aboard” is to enter a ship; while “to board” is to enter her as an enemy. “ To Jail aboard ” is to strike against another ship.
About—“ to go about ” is to change a vessel’s course by shifting her helm and placing her on another tack.
Adrift—a vessel is adrift when loose from her moorings and driven without control by wind, sea, or current. ’
Aft—behind, near the stern of a ship.
Amidships—the middle of a ship, either with regard to her length or her breadth; as
RBBPISO THS MAINSAIL ON A TBATNINO BHIP.
“ the enemy boarded us amidships,” i.e. halfway between stem and stern; “Put the helm amidships,” i.e. halfway between the two sides.
Astern—behind the ship.
Athwart hawse—the position of a ship when driven by wind, tide, or some accident across the stem of another, whether the two ships touch or are some little distance apart .Beam-see “ Abeam.”
Bear up, or bear down, or bear away—to change the course of a ship so as to make her run before the wind, after she has sailed for some time on a side wind or close-hauled.
“We bore up for Plymouth.” "We bore down on the enemy."
Bearing—the point of the compass on which any object appears; or the position of any object with reference to a given part of the ship.
Beating—" tacking," sailing by zig-zags against the direction of the wind.
Belay-—to make fast any running rope so that it does not run out when hauled upon.
Bend—to “bend” a sail is to affix it to its yard, boom, or gaff; to “bend” a cable is to make it fast to its anchor.
Digitized by LnOOQle
A " RAKING " BROADSIDE
Digitized by^OOQlC
758
THE STOHY OF THE SEA.
Berth.—a cabin or apartment; metaphorically, a place of anchorage.
Bight—any part of a rope between the ends; also a collar or eye formed by a rope. Bildt—tho part of a ship’s bottom which begins to round upwards. (From “bulge.”) Binnacle—(formerly “ bittacle," Fr. habitude), the frame or box containing the compass.
Board—a tack, the distance a ship goes upon one tack.
Boarding-netting—network triced round a ship to prevent boarders from entering.
Bow—On the bow, an object is “on the bows” when it comes within an arc of 45“ on either side of the ship’s stem. .
Box off—a ship having run up in the wind, or being taken with the wind ahead, the headyards are braced round to counteract its effect and prevent the ship being turned round against your inclination. This is termed “boxing off.”
Break ground—to weigh anchor and quit an anchorage.
Breeching—a. stout rope which prevents a gun from running too far in.
Bring to—to check the course of a ship by arranging her sails so that they counteract each other and keep her all but stationary. She is then said to lie to.
Bring up—to stop a ship’s way by dropping anchor.
Broach to—a ship “broaches to” when by the force of the wind, or a heavy sen upon her quarter, she is forced up to windward of her course in defiance of the helm. Similarly a boat is broached, or broaches to, among breakers, when turned broadside to the waves.
Bulwark—the wooden parapet of a ship’s side on either side of the forecastle, quarterdeck, or poop. '
Butt—the joining of two planks edgeways.
Cat's-paw—a light fluky air, perceived by its ruffling of the water.
Close hauled—the arrangement of a ship’s canvas when she is sailing “close to the wind,” i.e. as nearly as possible in the direction from which it is blowing.
Club-hauling—getting the vessel round with the help of an anchor; an operation only performed when in danger and close to a lee-shore.
Crank—a ship is “crank” when for want of ballast or from other causes she is too light in the water to carry sail without danger of upsetting.
Cutwater—the knee or bend of the stem.
Driver—an old name for the spanker.
Edge away—to sail a ship “larger" or “fuller,” i.e. less close to the wind than she was before.
Elect—an assemblage of ten or more ships-of-war. (See “Squadron.”)
Flotilla—a fleet of small vessels of war.
Fore-and-aft—the lengthway of a ship.
Forging ahead—to be forced ahead by the wind.
Founder—to sink.
Fox—a lashing made by twisting rope-yarns together. Spanish Fox is a single yarn untwisted and “laid up" the contrary way.
Furl—to wrap or roll up a sail and tie it to its proper yard or spar.
Cun shot—the long range of a cannon-shot.
Haul the wind—to sail a ship as close to the wind as possible.
Hawse—the position of the cables before a ship’s stem when she is moored with two anchors out from the bows. It also denotes any small distance ahead of a ship, or between her head and the anchors by which she is riding.
Heave to—see “Bring to." But “heaving” to an anchor is to take in cable until the ship is just over her anchor, before lifting the anchor from the ground.
Ki tot—a sea mile.
Digitized by Goode
GLOSSARY.
759
Labour—to pitch or roll heavily.
Laiulfull—first sight of land.
.Larboard—the left hand. The word has Iwen superseded by “ port.”
Larye—•a wind is large when it crosses the ship in a favourable direction, particularly ■when it crosses on the beam or abaft the beam.
Lasking—(obsolete). A tasking course is when a ship steers in an oblique or slanting direction towards another.
Lie to—see “Bring to.”
Luo mi tig—an indistinct apjtearance of distant objects, such as ships, mountains, etc., due to refraction. (Sen p. 699.)
Luff'-—to luff is to put the tiller down, or towards the lee side, thus forcing the ship’s head up closer to the wind. (For luff of a sail see above, “ Yards and Sails.”)
Offing—a good distance from the shore.
Overhaul—to overhaul a ship is to search her; to overhaul a rope is to pull it through a block.
PaLf off-—when a ship is sailing near the wind, and falls off from it in spite of the helm, she is said to pay off.
Plying—old term for beating to windward.
.Rake—a man-of-war is said to rake an enemy when her broadside sweeps the enemy’s decks fore and aft, either from Low or stern.
Raking—masts, etc., are said to rake, or be raking, when, instead of standing upright, they are inclined-
Ride-—to be held by a cable.
Round to—is when going large or before the wind the ship comes' round to the wind in answer to her helm.
Seize—to make fast.
Ship — to ship the tiller, etc,, is to fix it in its place.
Slip the cable—to unsplice it within, after allixing a buoy to show where the ship bos left her anchor.
“ Fleet,")
A SHIP STAVING.
Splice—to unite the broken strands of a rope.
Sgiving—to anchor with a spring is, before letting go the anchor, to pass a hawser oct of the stern or quarter-port and take it forward, outside the ship, and bend it to the ring of the anchor. By hauling on this hawser, the ship’s broadside can then bo made to bear in any desired direction.
Spring a mast—to crack or split it by any strain.
Squadron—an assemblage of ships of war less than ten. (See
Stand on—to hold on the same course.
Stay—to slay a ship is to change her tack by turning her head
to the wind. (See “ Wear.”)
Strike—to lower a sail, spar, or flag.
Tack—to change from one course to another, (See p. 10.)
Taunt or taut—a. taunt-rigged ship is one with very tall masts.
She is said to be all-a-tanto when she re-hoists her masts after having struck them for foul weather.
Thrum—to thrum a sail is to bore holes in it and insert a quantity of spun-yarn or rope-yarn, in order, by drawing the sail over a hole in the ship’s bottom, to assist in stopping a leak.
Unmoor—-I, to cast loose; 2, to reduce a ship to a single anchor and cable after she has been moored by two or more anchors.
Unship—to remove any piece of timber from the place in which it was fitted.
Digitized by Google
760
THE 8TOBY OF THE SEA.
Wahe—the track of a ship; the disturbed water immediately behind her.
Warp—to warp a ship is to pull her from one part of a harbour to another by means of warps (hawsers) attached to buoys, or to anchors, or to some other ship, or to the shore.
Way—a ship is said to be under way, or to have way upon her, when she has lifted anchor, and is moved by wind, tide, or current.
Weather—to weather a ship, headland, etc., is to sail to windward of it. Weather bow is that side of the bow on which the wind is blowing.
Wear—to -wear, or veer, a ship is to change her course by turning her stern to windward. (See “Stay,” and p. 12.)
Weigh—to heave up the anchor.
Printed by Cabbell & Company, Limited, La Belle Sauvage, Los don, E.C.
Digitized by^OOQlC