
H arry Treverton
HIS TRAMPS AND TROUBLES
TOLD BY HIMSELF
EDITED BY LADY BROOME
GEORGE ROUTLEDGE AND SONS, Limited
BROADWAY, LUDGATE HILL
Glasgow, Manchester, and New York

The Author, as well as the Editor, of “ Harry Treverton's Tramps and Troubles, ” desire to express their obligation to the Editor of the “Boy’s Own Paper "for his courtesy in permitting them to reprint this story, which has already appeared in his Magazine.
TO OUR BOY-READERS.
YOU will probably have already seen the story of “Harry Treverton’s Tramps and Troubles” in the pages of the Boy's Own Paper, where it had the honour of commencing a new volume last October; but it is precisely to those lads who have read it there that these lines are addressed.
A little mistake arose from the miscarriage of a letter, by which it seemed as if I had written this story when it appeared in the Boy’s Own Paper. Now, all the stories I have ever told you of this sort (and you, perhaps, know some of my tales as having been told you by Lady Barker), have been perfectly true, for I can’t invent adventures one little bit! So it comes to this that either I must have been pretending that I was once a boy, or else I must have invented the whole story.
This is how it happened :—
If any of you have ever come across my “ Letters to Guy,”* you will know that our West Australian summers are always spent on the most delightful little island a dozen miles out to
* Macmillan.
viii
PREFACE.
sea, and to windward of Sandtown. These pleasant summer days have been made more agreeable to us all the last few years since Mr. Timperley came there to be the Superintendent of the island, for I never heard anyone tell such delightful stories as he does. He has led the sort of life which is very interesting and pleasant to look back upon, and one docs not mind hearing about all these adventures from his lips, because one feels they cannot have done him any harm. Indeed, any of the boys who read these lines may be very well contented if, when they reach middle life, they at all resemble the Harry Treverton they are going to hear about presently. You would suppose that “Tramps and Troubles” must be the very finest things in the world to make a man of you, for the Harry Treverton who tells you this story, is just a picture of grand middle-age ; six feet high in his slippers, broad-shouldered and straight as a Life Guardsman, blue-eyed as the Lilian of his story, with white hair, and beard which looks almost ridiculous on such a young, fresh, merry face. How he would like to take you all out fishing or sailing with him in the lovely wide bay which stretches between his island and what we laughingly call Australia, for Rottnest is quite a long way off the main land. Or, if not on the water, it would be equal fun to go after wild duck on the Salt Lakes with him, or even to take a turn round the orchards, or the potato fields, or the fir-plantations which he is creating all over his little kingdom.
Well, Mr. Timperley used to tell us “grown-ups” what we found delightful stories, and one day I said to him (thinking first of my own particular boys), “ Why don’t you write down some of these stories, and make them into a book for boys ? ”
The answer was prompt, and I knew it to be true.
“ I have not time, and besides, I don’t quite know how to arrange stories so as to make a book of them.” So then I offered—entirely for the sake of all you boys—to take the
PREFACE.
ix
trouble off his hands, if he would just give me his rough notes. But when the rough notes reached me, I found there was very little to alter, for I knew boys would like much better to read the story almost exactly as it was told by its real writer. So in these pages you have the true record of the early days of one of our most valued and successful colonists, and I do not think you will have far to seek for the secret of that success.
It is true that these precise adventures could not happen to you now, so you need not take the next ship for Sandtown in hopes of commencing exactly where Harry Treverton did. The village of that distant time has changed into a thriving,, bustling port, with capital shops, a splendid town-hall, churches, fine private houses, and, above all, a railway station, and I fancy the young Custom House officers of these days must rather envy the easy life led by Will Summers. And the wonderful thing is to think that probably before the boys who read these lines have reached Harry Treverton’s present age, the Sandtown of to-day, busy and prosperous as it looks, will be even as the Sandtown of thirty years ago compared to the anticipated growth and improvement of our flourishing port.
Perhaps you may like to read this extract from the West Australian, which has also appeared in T/ie Boy’s Otun Paper, as well as a little explanation of my small share in the story, which I begged the Editor to insert.
“ A new aspirant for literary fame has appeared in the person of Mr. W. H. Timperley, Superintendent of Rottnest Island. ‘ Far from the madding crowd,’ he has devoted the leisure won from his official duties on his island home to the writing of a West Australian story. It is entitled ‘ Harry Treverton,’ and has advanced so far beyond the merely initial stage as to have been actually accepted by a publisher, and it is now in the press. Lady Broome, we are informed, kindly undertook the task of looking over the work, and in
X
PREFACE.
some respect to edit it, at the special request of Mr. Timperley. It is to be published in The Boy's Own Paper as a serial story, and the opening chapters will probably appear in the number of that periodical for the present month, which will arrive here about the end of November. The subject matter of the work deals with the life and adventures of a youth who, owing to adverse and unforeseen circumstances, found himself, about thirty years ago, thrown on his own resources in Western Australia. The history of his life, touching, as it will do, many things and many events which must be familiar to hundreds of people here, and which must also have an interest for others to whom such conditions and events are new and strange, will surely enable the author to weave a tale that will secure the attention, arouse the sympathy, and attract the fancy, not only of the young folks, but of others of more mature growth and understanding. The foundation of the story is laid on facts—on events that have actually occurred—and all the characters, we are told, have lived, and moved, and had their being amid the scenes of this colony. Some of those who are pictured in the book, we are assured, still live; others have passed away to the land of shadows. The following extract from a letter by the editor of The Boy's Own Paper to Lady Broome—who, as already said, has deeply interested herself in the matter—will show how far the work has progressed, and how near Mr. Timperley’s labours are to fruition. The writer says:—‘“Harry Treverton” is quite safe in my hands. It is now being rather elaborately illustrated by a well-known artist, Mr. Alfred Pearse, and will commence in our October numbers, which go to press towards the end of August’ Since Mr. Timperley is so widely and favourably known in this colony, the local booksellers may expect an extensive demand for their future supplies of the periodical referred to.”
So now you know exactly how this story came to be written, first by Mr. Timperley, and then just edited by your old friend,
M. A. BROOME.
CONTENTS.
CHAPTER	PAGE
I	.—A STRANGER IN A STRANGE LAND -	-	-	13
II	.-A FRIEND IN NEED.......................21
III	.— “OUT YOU go!” -	-	-	-	-	-	31
IV	.—MAKING UP THE SWAG -----	44
V	.—ON THE TRAMP ------	5	I
VI	.-A NIGHT IN THE BUSH -	-	-	-	- 6l
VII	.—THE BUSH-FIRE ------	71
VIII	.—shingle-splitters’ yarns -----	82
IX	.—jack’s yarn -------	88
X	.—DISAPPOINTMENT -..........................
XI	.—BACHELOR HALL	-	-	-	-	-	-	111
XII	.—JEALOUSY -	-	-	-	-	-	"	-119
XIII	.—lost! -	-	-	_....................’3Z
XIV	.-FOUND..................................T44
XV	.—cattle-drovers	-	-	-	-	-	-	J59
XVI	.—deadman’s SPRING........................H1
XVII	.—ON ALL fours -	-	-	-	-	-	-	184
XVIII	.—THE CATTLE-STATION	------ 198
XIX	.—BUSH LIFE	-------	206
XX	.-BUSH SPORT -..........................219
xii	CONTENTS.
XXI	.—WE GO SEALING -	-	-	-	-	-	228
XXII	.—HARD LINES	-..........................238
XXIII	.—PLACE AUX DAMES ! -	-	-	-	-	-	246
XXIV	.—FIRST LOVE -	-	-	-	-	-	-	-	253
XXV	.-“GOOD-BYE, SWEETHEART, GOOD-BYE”	-	-	267
XXVI	.—BANISHMENT	-	-	-	-	-	-	-	277
XXVII	.-AT DEATH’S DOOR ------	290
XXVIII.—MY LOVE AND I	!	-	-	-	-	-	-	-	3&I
jmOD UtaWY OF W^
HARRY TREVERTON.
CHAPTER I.
A STRANGER IN A STRANGE LAND.
J T is many years ago, now, since the old Sea Nymph let go her anchor at daylight one bright morning off a small seaport on the western coast of Australia.
We had been four months on the voyage from England, and the long-looked-for day had dawned at last. Instead, however, of green pastures, sleek cattle, and flocks of sheep, dreamed of during all that weary time, I only saw a few white buildings standing amid still whiter sand, with a background of miserable, stunted trees and scrub, which someone told me was called the “ bush.” However, the air felt delicious—mild and yet crisp, and the sky seemed like a wonderful blue dome with crimson and golden rays streaming up rapidly from the eastern edge of the wide sea behind us.
Uninviting as the place looked, I longed as anxiously to feel the blessed earth once more beneath my feet as though it were indeed the Eden I had grown to fancy it must prove, during those long weeks of sea and sky-gazing. The moment 13
14
HARRY TRE VERTON.
I could venture to speak to the captain, which was not until we were safely riding at anchor, I bade him and his crew a kindly farewell and jumped into the very first shore-boat.
I am bound to say Sandtown did not improve on closer inspection, but the delight of finding myself on land was great. The hotel seemed luxuriously large and comfortable to me, and the pleasure of a fresh-water bath and change of clothes was great, as all sea-travellers well know. Feeling thoroughly clean and happy, I descended to the parlour just as the landlord of the “ Raven ” entered the room.
“ Beg pardon, sir, but is your name Treverton ? ”
“Yes,” I replied, “my name is Harry Treverton, the only passenger by the Sea Nymph, just arrived.”
“ Well, sir, there’s an old man outside wishes to speak to you.”
“ Indeed ! What sort of an old man ? ” I asked, feeling rather surprised at being inquired for so promptly.
“He seems a decent sort of fellow, sir ; a working man by the look of him.”	•
“All right, show him in ; ” and in another moment a greyheaded man, dressed in moleskin trousers and blue shirt, with a belt round his waist, stood at the door, hat in hand.
“ Come in, my man. Do you wish to see me ? ” I asked.
“Yes, sir, if you’re Mr. Harry Treverton.”
“ Yes, my name is Treverton. What do you wish to see me
about ? Are you one of Mr. Remison’s servants ? ”
A STRANGER IN A STRANGE LAND. 15
“Well, I zvas, sir, and I’m sorry to say I’ve got bad news for you.”
“ I hope not. Is Mr. Remison ill ? ”
“ Mr. Remison, sir,” said the old man, looking very hard at me, “ is dead.”
“ Dead 1 ” I exclaimed.
“Yes, sir; been dead and buried more than a month.”
“ What is your name ? ” I asked ; “ and how is it you bring me this dreadful news ? ”
“Well, sir, my name is James Ramshaw, better known as Old Jimmy, and for some years past I've been Mr. Remison’s head man on the farm. Many’s the time he’s told me about a Mister Treverton as he used to go to college with, and how his son Harry was coming out to live with him and learn farming-. Being a bachelor, I know he was a lonesome sort of a gentleman and had but few friends.”
“ Did he leave any letter or message for me ? ” I asked.
“There was no time for that, sir; the Lord called him very sudden,” said old Jimmy, solemnly. “We was workin’ in the same field together, when all at once I see him stagger and fall on his face. I ran to him, quick as my legs ’ud take me, but he only give two or three gasps like, and was gone afore I could turn him over. Some on us carried him to the house, and we sent to the nighest p’lice station. Something they calls a hinquest was held on him, poor old chap, and we was
16
HARR Y TRE YERTOX.
told as he’d died of heart disease. Mr. Perks, his lawyer, took charge of the place, put his own men in possession, paid us all off, and then, for the poor old master’s sake, I came right on down here, knowing you was to arrive in the fust ship.”
Jimmy’s voice had broken more than once as he told his story, and when it was ended he fairly turned his back on me, and I saw him draw his sleeve across his eyes. I felt quite stunned, and all the bright hopes which I had brought into the dingy parlour with me ten minutes before had vanished
4 STRANGER IN A STRANGE LAND.
17
utterly, leaving me a bewildered, homeless, friendless boy, a stranger, indeed, in a strange land. My own voice was far from steady as I tried to say, bravely,
“Well, Jimmy, although you have brought me very bad news, it was uncommonly kind and thoughtful of you to look me up so soon, and I thank you heartily. Now, the next question is, what on earth am I to do ? ”
“Ah, sir, that depends a good deal on how you are sitti-vated,” said Jimmy, scratching his head. “ Of course, if you’ve money, you could buy a share in a sheep or cattle station, or take a farm.”	.
“But I have no money at all, Jimmy, nor do I know a soul in the colony who would lend me a shilling.”
“ Dear, dear,” muttered the old fellow ; “ that’s very bad for a young chap like you. How old may you be, sir ? Not more noi' eighteen, I should guess.”
“Not so much ; seventeen last birthday.”
“You see, sir, it’s just this way: if you was a poor man’s son you might go behind a bar, turn ostler, or drive a cart. There’s lots of things to be done hereabouts, in the way of getting a living, but as a young gentleman now------”
Here Jimmy paused, and looked extremely shy and uncomfortable.
“ I know what you are thinking, old chap ; that a young gentleman thrown on his own resources in a strange country
2
18 HA RUY TRE VER 7 ON.
is about the most useless animal on the face of the earth. Isn’t that so ? ”
“Well, Mr. Treverton, you’ve put it a deal plainer than I'd like to have done, but you’re not far out, sir, and that’s a fact.”
Jimmy’s frankness, although I had brought it on myself, was so disconcerting that I had to take a turn about the room before I could pull myself together sufficiently to be able to say, cheerfully,
“Of course I’m not. I know nothing about business; never did a stroke of work in my life ; have very little money, and certainly not a friend — excepting yourself, Jimmy — nearer than fourteen thousand miles off. I’ve had a tolerably good education, but I don't know that I’ve learnt anything that would be of any use to me at a pinch.”
“ Bless you, sir, what’s the good of talkin’ about education in this place?” cried Jimmy. “I know a man as lives up country, and who shows me a penny one day, and says he to me, ‘Look here, Jimmy, that’s all the money I had in the world when I landed in the colony, and now I’m worth thousands. But if you was to double my capital on conditions as I wrote out the amount fair and square like, I couldn’t do it.’ After a while the old chap did learn to sign his cheques, but the bankers was the only people as could read the name, and I did hear one of ’em say it would take a mighty smart man to forge that same signature.”
A STRANGER IN A STRANGE LAND.
19
“ And how did your friend manage to become so rich, Jimmy?” I asked, with some natural interest and curiosity.
“Well, sir, he just took off his coat to it, at the rate of twenty-five shillings a month at first. Bein’ a sober, hardworking chap he soon had his wages doubled. All the while he was saving every penny, till he saw his chance, and when he did get that chance he took it — bought sheep when they was cheap, sold ’em when they was dear; speculated in a small way in bits of land—‘grants,’ they call ’em—and so forth. Yet it took even him years of hard work to make his pile, but now there ain’t a more comfortabler man in the whole colony. A gentleman as was stayin’ at his place asked him t’other day how he’d managed to get along so well. ‘ It’s not much of a secret,’ he says; ‘I just kep’ sober, worked hard, and watched my chances.’ That’s how he put it, sir.”
“A very good way, too, Jimmy,” I said, heartily, as I held out my hand, for I saw the old man wanted to go about his own affairs; “and I must only see if I can’t manage to do something like it. Thank you very much for your kindness in coming, and good-bye for the present.”
“ Good-bye, sir ; and if I can be any morsel of use, don’t be above asking me,” said the garrulous old fellow, shaking my hand cordially, and then stumping out of the room.
Now what was I to do? The position I found myself in, though mercifully I did not realise at the moment its utter
2—2
20
HARRY TREVERTON.
desolation, was by no means pleasant. I found myself saying aloud, “ A stranger in a strange land,” as if the words had cast a spell over me. I was young and healthy, indeed, but utterly inexperienced, ignorant of all practically useful knowledge, friendless, and well-nigh penniless. Well, I’m thankful to remember, as I look back on that dark hour, that I made one resolution on the spot, and that was nothing more nor less than that, with God’s help, I would try to earn an honest living somehow, and, as Jimmy puts it, “take off my coat” to any work at any wages I could get. That very night I dreamed—for I ate a good supper, and fell asleep as though I had not a care in the world — that old Jimmy and I were playing pitch-and-toss with pennies, and that mine all turned into sovereigns. Part of that dream came true enough, as to the pitching and tossing ahead of me, but it may be confessed at once that the sovereigns which for a long time fell to my share were, indeed, few and far between.
CHAPTER II.
A FRIEND IN NEED.
j\J EXT morning I was up and dressed betimes, and as the dusty roads about Sandtown did not look very inviting,
I strolled down to the smooth white beach. The old Sea Nymph. lay perfectly still and motionless on the glass-like blue water, as though she were resting after her rough and weary passage. As I gazed I almost wished I were going home to Old England in her, so forlorn and lonely did I feel. But no! I must not look back, unless to reflect how my parents had spent every spare shilling—and spare shillings were scarce at home, I very well knew—in providing the necessary passage money and my modest outfit.
I travelled along the pleasant shore with a confused jumble of high and heroic resolves, a sinking feeling of friendlessness, and a strong dash of home-sickness, all struggling to get the upper hand of each other in my poor sevcnteen-years-old mind, when, in turning round a low, sandy promontory, I came quite suddenly on a young man standing on a flat rock at the water’s edge. He was using only a primitive sort of handline, but he appeared to be having splendid sport, and hauled in every other moment a beautiful whiting. I sat down on 21
22
HARRY TREVERTON.
some dry sea-weed to watch him. He turned his head for an instant, but a fresh tug at his line prevented his looking at me, whilst he said, in a pleasant cheery voice, “Good morning, Mr. Treverton.”
I jumped to my feet in bewildered surprise and returned his greeting, expressing at the same time my natural astonishment at his knowledge of my name.
“ Oh, there’s nothing very wonderful about that,” he replied, with the backward glance and nod which was all the rapidity of his sport permitted ; “ I happen to have the honour of being a clerk—the clerk, in point of fact—in Her Majesty’s Custom House here, and when the old Sea Nymph's papers were handed in yesterday I saw your name down as the only passenger, and as you are also the only new chum in Sandtown, I presumed you to be that identical individual.”
“Yes, my name is Harry Treverton, and I have come out to see what Australia is like, and so far I must say I have been disappointed,” I said, dolefully.
“ But, my dear young friend, you have not yet seen anything whatever of even this one colony, much less of Australia ! It’s a big place, I can tell you, and you just wait till you go up country and see something of bush life. I only wish I was there now instead of being stuck in this beastly hole, shut up in an office all day, and only getting a solitary hundred a year for grinding away at it all! ”
A FRIEND IN NEED.
23
“ I suppose you don’t see many strangers here ? ” I asked, anxious to continue the conversation, and yet doubtful of the best way of getting this lively young man to go on talking to me.
“ No, indeed,” he answered, with a merry laugh at a question whose absurdity I very soon came to see myself. “You know the colony is but young yet, and we don’t get more than half a dozen ships a year, so that we are not overburdened with work in my department, though the chief keeps me at my desk all day, ‘just for the look of the thing,’ he says, confound him ! ”
“ Well, from what I’ve seen as yet,” I sagely remarked, trying to speak as though I were an old traveller of wide and varied experience, and failing dismally in the attempt, “it does not appear to me that any one can have anything to do. A couple of public-houses, two or three shops—stores you call them, don’t you ?—and a few small houses appear to make up your town. I don’t know where the inhabitants can be, for I have scarcely seen a soul since I landed yesterday.”
“Ah! you must wait till Sunday to see the people, especially the ladies, when they troop to church, dressed in all the colours of the rainbow! ” And as he said this, he had got up, as though weary of his sport, and gathered his shining heap of fish into a rude basket. I rose, too, and we strolled
24
JIA ARY TRE VER TON.
about, walking at the water’s edre and talking easterly of pretty nearly every subject under the sun.
At last my new friend remarked that he “ really must be off,” as he had to be at his office at nine o’clock. We walked back to the town together, and before we parted I begged him to come and see me at the “ Raven ” that same evening, and have another chat, which he readily promised to do.
My spirits rose very much after meeting this young man, who had not even told me his name, but he seemed so bright and cheerful and self-reliant, that I quite looked forward to our next meeting.
After breakfast I set out for a stroll through the town, but I soon found the sun had become much too hot to be pleasant out of doors, so there was nothing for it but to return to the coffee-room of the hotel (as the “ Raven ” public-house called itself) and get through the time as best I could, by reading the local newspaper and watching the customers. 1 must say these appeared to be a very thirsty lot, and I noticed one man particularly, who must have swallowed at least a dozen tumblers of brandy-and-water during the day without becoming, as far as I could judge, at all tipsy.
About eight o’clock in the evening a gentleman entered the dingy room, glanced round its guests, and then, walking up to me, held out his hand, saying, “Good evening,
^J3L© LlBftAW GF W ■
A FRIEND IN NEED. 25
Mr. Treverton, allow me to introduce myself; my name is William Summers. Look well at me, young man, and see if you recognise the humble fisherman you condescended to make friends with this morning.”
“ Mr. Summers,” I exclaimed, “ I am very pleased to meet you again, but I really did not know you just at first.”
“ Of course not,” he said, with his pleasant smile ; “ this morning I was the rather disreputable-looking fisherman ; this evening I am a highly respectable, though underpaid, Government clerk — an example of the truism about clothes making the man. And how have you been getting on all day ? ”
“ Well, I think my principal occupation has consisted of watching people drink, and very poor fun it has been.”
“Ah, yes; they do ‘imbibe considerable,’ as the Yankees say ; just touch the bell, and we’ll have a beer each, as a matter of form.”
The beer was brought, and we settled ourselves comfortably near an open window, and began to chat pleasantly enough.
“Yes,” continued Summers, “it really is wonderful what quantities of liquor some people consume. I knew one man, (he’s dead now, poor fellow) who used to put one of these pound notes regularly every morning in his pocket, just for drinks, and if a champagne spree or anything of that sort
26
HARRY TREVERTON.
chanced to be on, he’d spend three or four times that amount at the bar.”
“ But that must run away with a lot of money,” I remarked.
“ Yes, and not only money, but it runs away with a man’s constitution as well. I remember suggesting to that same man as delicately as I could that unless he ‘put the peg in’ he would very soon ‘ peg out.’ The poor fellow quite agreed with me, and even volunteered to tell me that his grandfather and his father had both died of nothing whatever but drink, and added, sadly enough, that he supposed the brandy-bottle would make an end of him too. ‘ Why should it, my dear fellow ? ’ I asked him, very naturally; and I never can forget the look he gave me, like a wild hunted creature, as he cried, ‘Why should it ? You don’t suppose for a minute I can help myself, do you ? Haven’t I just been telling you it runs in the family?’ And within twelve months of our talk he was a dead man.”
“ Horrible ! ” I cried ; “ but surely there can’t be many men like that ? ”
“Oh, yes, there are, I’m sorry to say, lots of them ; everywhere, I suppose, but you seem to run across them more in a colony.”
We both sat silent for a little while, and at last Summers went on in a low voice, and still staring out of the window into the quiet street,
A FRIEND IN NEED.
27
“ I knew another man who had been a great drunkard, and suddenly turned into a total abstainer, becoming a most respectable member of society. However, he fell ill, and as he ran down very low the doctor ordered him stimulants, which the patient steadily refused to touch. Of course the doctor got very angry, and asked the sick man whether he meant to take what he, the doctor, ordered him, or not. ‘I’ll take anything you like, doctor,’ the poor fellow answered, ‘ so long as it’s not intoxicating liquor.’ ‘But, my good man,’ said the doctor, ‘ if you don’t take this stimulant you’ll certainly die.’ ‘Very well, sir,’ he said, ‘I’ll have the satisfaction of dying a teetotaler, thank you all the same.’ And die he did, although his clergyman tried to show him that no pledge held good in such an extremity, and his wife and children implored him with tears to give way. The doctor vowed that the next total abstainer might doctor himself, and stoutly declared the man had as completely committed suicide as though he bad cut his throat. For my own part I believe in the happy medium, and it must be very medium indeed when a man has to live, and live like a gentleman, too, on a hundred a year.”
“Well,” I replied, “I should think myself uncommonly lucky if I could see my way towards earning even half that sum,” and I seized, rather adroitly, on the chance this turn in the conversation gave me to acquaint my friend with my real position.
28
HARR Y TRE KER TOM
“So it just comes to this, that you’ve been kicked out into the cold with only five pounds in your pocket and not a friend in the place,” said Summers, somewhat roughly. “ Why, how long do you think that is going to last you ? ”
My heart was sinking within me, partly at my new friend’s tone, and partly because I seemed to realise my position more vividly when I heard my own voice. I could not help wondering a little at its calmness—telling my own story boldly enough, Heaven knows. However, I gulped down a certain lumpy feeling in my throat, and said, almost gaily, “ About ten days, I suppose ; but it must last as long as ever I can make it do.”
“We’ll say the ten, or twelve days, if you like, are over; what then ? ”
“ That’s exactly the question I’ve been asking myself ever since old Jimmy left this room yesterday, and I don’t feel any nearer answering it,” I acknowledged. And then I added, desperately, feeling as if I were a gambler playing my last card, “Can you give me any advice?” One does not forget such moments as I was then passing through, especially if they are a first experience, and I remember now how the thought flashed through my brain of what would become of me if he answered, as I half expected, that he had no advice to offer. But instead of the dreaded words Summers looked
A FRIEND IN NEED.
29
kindly at me (I dare say I was pale enough), and said, in the most friendly voice,
“ Yes, my boy, I’ll advise you to the best of my ability, and the first thing I have to suggest is that you settle up with the landlord of this hotel at once.”
“ But where can I possibly go then ? ” I asked, with a vision of a night on the doorstep suddenly rising up before my boyish mind, only to be chased from it by a swiftly succeeding picture of a forlorn figure lying under a bush on the sandhills.
“ You must just come and stop for a bit with me,” Summers said firmly, holding up his hand to stop me, as I tried to protest ; for, after all, was he not very nearly as badly off as I was ? “ Now, don’t make any objection. It will cost me next to nothing to give you a shake-down and a share of what grub is going. It won’t be very grand, I can promise you, but such as it is you’ll be heartily welcome to it, and I shall be glad of your company ; so come along and get your box packed, and we’ll swag it down between us to my crib.”
This was, indeed, a most unexpected and friendly offer, and as I could see it was meant to be taken in the same spirit, I accepted joyfully, stammering out my thanks, which were, indeed, heartfelt. Summers cut short my broken sentences with a cheery, “ Oh, that’s all right! When you become a bloated member of the squatocracy you can ask me up to
3°
HARRY TRE VERTON.
your station, you know, and I’ll come like a shot. Let’s see about getting that box down at once; it’s close upon ten o’clock, I declare.”
The box was packed, the landlord paid, and my second night in Australia was spent under the roof of this chance acquaintance, who had thus in my great need proved himself to be a friend indeed.
CHAPTER III.
“■OUT you go!”
gEFORE going to his office next day Summers provided me with writing materials, and after he had left I sat down and wrote my father a long letter. This epistle was composed in a far different spirit and style from what it would have been twenty-four hours before. Of course I had to tell him of poor Mr. Reinison’s death, which I knew would be a shock to him, leaving me as it did absolutely friendless, with half the width of the globe between me and my home. But I wrote as hopefully and cheerfully as, indeed, I felt, dwelling on the kindness of my chance acquaintance, with whom I was then staying, and who had promised to help me to find employment. I added, as all boys do, that I was in good health and spirits, and hoped soon to be able to tell him that I was earning a respectable living.
In spite of this occupation the day seemed a long one, for it was past four o’clock before I heard Summers’ step outside and his gay voice singing,—
“ Oh, never let your chances Like sunbeams pass you by, Or you’ll never miss the water Till the well runs dry.”
31
32
HARRY TREVERTON.
“What do you thing of that for a motto, old man?” he asked.
“Well,” I answered, sagely, “it bears out what old Jimmy Ramshaw told me two days ago — something about a settler
WRITING HOME.
in this very colony, I believe, who boasts of having landed with one penny only in his pocket, and has since become a rich squatter, all through watching and taking advantage of his chances.”
“ Oh, I know the old boy well! ” Summers cried ; “and by
“OUT YOU GO:"
33
the same token, if you want a sample of real Australian hospitality, just ride up to his station some day. It does not matter a straw whether he knows you or not, the moment your foot is out of the stirrup your horse is led away and properly cared for, while you are cordially shaken by the hand, taken indoors, and treated like a prince. Nice house, comfortable rooms, plenty to eat and drink, and, above all, a genuine welcome. You are begged to tell any little news or gossip you may have heard, which you do as well as you can. Then, when the ladies have gone off to bed the old man brings out some ancient-looking bottles, gets out his long clay pipe, and then starts off for an airing on his hobby-horse. You arc shown the identical penny he brought to the colony, and are told about the first horse your host bought. Its price was ten shillings, and you learn how a saddle was made out of sheepskin and rope, how kangaroo was the only meat tasted from one year’s end to the other, and how boiled wheat took the place of bread. It is all uncommonly interesting but at last you begin to nod, and after more offers of something to drink (which you’ll refuse if you are wise), you are shown into a splendid bedroom, where you sink into about three feet of down, and know nothing more till the sun is shining into your room, and the crowing of cocks and neighing of horses tells you your first night at Penny Place Farm is ended and over.”
3
34
HARRY TRE VER TOM
My boy readers may imagine how eagerly I drank in every word of this long but fascinating story, with eyes and ears equally on the alert. When it was ended I came back to real life with a sort of gasp, and just managed to ask, in order to show how practical I was, “ And this man contrived to make his money just through sticking to work and making good bargains ? ”
“Yes, my boy, just through that; and, what’s better, Old Pennypicce, as we call him, is by no means the only man who has made a comfortable home in this colony. Unfortunately there are some who act according to the saying, ‘Make money, honestly if you can, but make it,’ and are not particular how they carry out the command. For instance, I know one man who lives about a couple of hundred miles from here, on a line of road to the back country, and who has made quite a little pile of money by buying lean horses and fattening them up for the market.
“What!” I exclaimed, in horror; “you don’t mean to say people eat horseflesh in Australia ? ”
Summers burst out laughing.
“No, they don’t, you greenhorn, unless they are precious hard up, and then they eat horses, saddles, and bridles, and all they can get! As a rule, Australians have plenty of beef and mutton, but the man I’m talking about found customers in the travellers who reached his station with knocked-up
muo LIBRARY Or* wm
‘lOUT YOU GO.'” 35
animals. His game was to sell one of his own horses for about twenty pounds, and allow the traveller something like fifty shillings for his poor tired beast, which would immediately be turned into a good paddock, and in three months it would be rolling fat, and as fresh as paint. If ever you meet him he’ll be sure to tell you his favourite yarn, and it’ll be something like this.” ■
Here Summers stuck a hat on one side of his head, put his thumbs in the arms of his waistcoat, and made himself in a moment, by a subtle change of voice and manner, into a capital imitation of an old farmer of the rough-and-ready type, and began thus :
“Yes, there’s a bit o’ money to be made in ’orseflesh, if you only knows how to set about it. One day a reg’lar new chum rides up to my station and says, says he, ‘ My ’orse is clean knocked up, and got a sore back besides. Can you sell me an hanimal ? ’ ‘In course I can.’ So I sells him one for twenty pound, allowin’ him five pound for his screw, and that was doin’ the thing real ’ansome, I can tell you! Well, my bold ’orseman rides away, and in about six months’ time back he comes with the same hanimal as I’d sold him. Poor beast, you wouldn’t ha’ known it; scarcely a leg to stand on, and a staring coat over ribs stickin’ up like the timbers of a broken-up boat. In course he’s wishful to buy another ’orse, and axes me, quite mournful-like, if I’d anything at a reasonable
3—2
36
HAEEY TEEYEETON.
figger as ’uld suit him. ‘Well, sir,’ says I, ‘here be an extraordinary valuable hanimal, but I’m afeard the price ’ll be summat ’igh for you.’ ‘ Trot him out,’ says he, ‘ and let’s have a look at him.’ So I had the saddle put on the ’orsc, and he just looked splendid. ‘Yes,’ says the new chum, ‘he’s a very good stamp of a horse, that,’ and he feels his legs, looks into his mouth; in fact, takes stock of him all over. ‘Yes, I think he’ll do. What’s your figure ? ’
“ ‘ Well, sir,’says I,‘the price o’ that there ’orse is thirty pound.’
“ ‘ Come, come,’ says he, ‘ you’re laying it on rather thick, aren’t you ? ’
“ ‘ Take the ’orse back to the stable, Jim,’ says I; ‘ come in and ’ave a bit of dinner, sir.’
“ ‘ Oh,’ he says, ‘ business first, and pleasure afterwards. Hold on a bit with that horse, my man.’ Well, to make a long story short, he takes the horse at my price, and I don't doubt but that, by the time he got to his journey’s end, he’d find out that he and that hanimal was quite old friends ; for you see, sir, it wor the werry same ’orse as I’d give him five pounds for six months previous, only he couldn’t see through his fat. Bless your ’art, you can always sell a bad ’orse with lots of fat on him to a new chum, when he’d turn up his nose at a real good hanimal as was low in condition.”
“OUT YOU GOU
37
“ Well, there’s one comfort,” I remarked, “ that class of gentleman won’t be likely to make much out of me.”
“ That’s all very well,” Summers answered ; “ but I take it you would be more comfortable if your pockets were somewhat better lined than they are just at present, hey ? What’s the sum total, old man ? ”
“ Take fifteen shillings paid to old Pewters from five pounds, and four pound five remain.”
“ Good boy ! go up top. Now, what do you propose to do ? ”
“ Hire a horse, and go to the city in search of a billet,” I replied.
“ That means throwing away ten shillings at the livery stables, and another ten at the hotels. No, we can save that pound, and I will give you my experience for nothing, which will pay much better. A pound saved is a pound gained. There now, we are making money already, hey ? ” And Summers had to pause and chuckle at his own wit before he could go on soberly, in true Mentor fashion.
“ Now we will presume that you have ridden your fifteen miles, and that the ostler at the Royal Arms has taken youi animal to the stables, and that you’ve refreshed yourself with a glass of beer and a biscuit. You then start for a tour round the Government offices, beginning, naturally, with the most important, and you send in your card to the Under-Secretary. After a few minutes’ delay you are shown into a plain but
38
HARRY TREVERTON.
comfortable and workmanlike room. Very civil gentleman ; he rises, bows, shakes hands,- offers you a chair. ‘ Lately arrived, Mr. Treverton, I presume ? Splendid climate, good opportunities for investment, beautiful country lately discovered, hope you intend to remain in the colony,’ and so forth. At last he pulls up; then you make a little speech (which, however, he has heard before) about unfortunate and unforeseen circumstances having placed you in rather an awkward position, and you add that you have called to ascertain if there be any probability of obtaining a clerkship in the Government service.
“ The friendly gentleman at once turns into a stern official, touches a hand-bell, and in walks a smart young man, weighing, as you find out afterwards, about seven stone nothing, and drawing seventy pounds a year salary.
“‘Mr. Jones,’ says the stern official, ‘hand me down the candidates’ book, please.’ This is done in solemn silence, and it is politely opened by the smart clerk before handing it to his superior, who turns over the leaves rapidly, saying, ‘ Humph ! humph ! ’ to himself, and finally shuts it up with a bang.
“‘Sorry to say, Mr. Tarrington’ (Treverton, you suggest)— ‘Mr. Treverton, I mean—that I cannot hold out the slightest prospect of being able to give you any employment in the public service for some years to come ; however, I shall be
“0177 YOU GO.'”
39
happy to take your name and address, if you wish me to do so.’
“You remark that you fear such an entry in his book would, under the circumstances, be useless to you, and then you rise and bow with what civility you can muster up, ‘ Good morning, sir ; good morning, sir.’ And out you go. As you ramble along the street your eye falls on a brass plate with ‘ Perks and Perks, Solicitors,’ on it. Happy thought; try Perks. Ring at the bell. 'Is Mr. Perks in? ‘Yes, sir, but he’s engaged just now ; take a seat, please.’ So you sit down and watch the clerks as they scribble away, wondering, perhaps, whether you’ll ever be able to scribble at that rate. Presently a youth comes out of an inner room and shows you back into it. An old gentleman looks over his spectacles at you, says ‘ Good morning,’ and points to a chair. You introduce yourself as Mr. Treverton, a friend of the late Mr. Remison’s. ‘ Oh, indeed,’ says Perks; ‘ any relation, hey?’ ‘No, but a friend of my father’s; and his death has placed me in rather an awkward position, you see. In fact, Mr. Perks, I have called to ask if you can give me employment as a copying clerk, or something of that kind.’
“ Old Perks stares at you as though you had asked him for his daughter, with ten thousand pounds as her marriage portion.
“‘Copying clerk, hey?’ he exclaims at last. ‘No, indeed,
40 HARRY TREVERTON.
sir; my copying clerks are all articled, and have to pay me. I don't pay them 1 Sorry I’m not able to oblige you. Good morning.’
‘“Good morning, sir.’ And out you go again.
I could not help laughing at the vision of old Perks and his imaginary wrath, and Summers was obliged to pause, and let me have my laugh out; indeed, he so far descended from his dignity as a narrator to join in it ; but as he clearly regarded this mirth as mere waste of time, he soon recovered his gravity, and set off again, to describe yet another stage of my imaginary quest to my dismayed ears.
“ Perhaps your next move may be to try Draper and Treddle, the great merchants. By this time you are growing desperate, so you cast all shyness and modesty aside, walk boldly into the counting-house, as if the whole place belonged to you, and ask to see Mr. Draper. The clerk stares, and at once recognises you as a very new chum indeed by that same question. However, he looks quite grave, and tells you, in a sort of solemn whisper, that no one ever can see Mr. Draper, for he lives at his country house, and comes but rarely into the office; however, he adds that it is just within the bounds of possibility you may be allowed to speak to the manager. In a sort of ‘Lead on, Macbeth’ frame of mind you follow him into a room where sits an uncommonly stout and florid gentleman, whose well-cut clothes and massive
“OUT YOU GO.'”
4i
watch-chain point him out to you as your next victim. With as much courage as is left to you by this time you walk boldly up to him and ask permission to speak to him. He, too, stares at you, but only bows, without helping you by a word.
“ * May I inquire, sir, if there is any possibility of obtaining employment in your house ? ’
“ ‘ As what ? ’ he asks abruptly.
“ ‘ Oh, I am not at all particular,’ you say. ‘ I would take anything that would suit me.’
“ ‘ Well now,’ growls the stout gentleman, ‘ that is really very kind of you, young sir. May I ask what line of business you’ve been in ? ’
“You tell him that you have never been in business in your life, but would be willing and glad to learn. At this artless remark the big man laughs unpleasantly, and tells you shortly and gruffly that he has no vacancies for pupils, but when he has he’ll let you know. And with another bow, out you go again.
“ By this time you begin to feel rather small, and to imagine that the people in this part of the world must be very ungracious and unfeeling, but you go on doggedly trying at every door, and at last get to the factories, determined to take a ‘ hand’s ’ place if ‘ better may not be.’ But it is always the same story—‘No place for an ignorant beginner, and
“OUT YOU GO.'”
43
rather hard to you at first, but it will do you good and make a man of you. But you must be tired of my long yarns, so I’m not going to begin another at this time of night. We’ll just go to bed now, and to-morrow we’ll take steps to put you in the way of making a respectable living and becoming a good colonist. So keep up your spirits, hope for the best, and—good night 1 ”
“ Good night, old man, and God bless you ! ” I said, huskily ; “you are the only friend I have within fourteen thousand miles.”
We took up our candles and went into the next room, and ten minutes afterwards were both sound asleep.
CHAPTER IV.
MAKING UP THE SWAG.
“^yHAT were you dreaming about last night, Harry?” asked Summers, next morning. “ Do you know you were moaning and sobbing a good deal in the middle of the night ? I suppose you were not awake, were you ? ”
“ No, but I had some very unpleasant dreams ; in one of them I seemed to be back in my old home, and suddenly the dear old pater came into my room, and, looking at me very solemnly, said, ‘Out you go, Harry; out you go!’ I could not find a word to say to him, and something seemed to push me out of the room. You can’t think how wretched I felt, and the tears came into my eyes at the recollection of home unkindness (so different from the dear reality), even though it was only in a dream.”
“ Dreams are all bosh ! ” cried Summers, gaily; “ and, besides, they always * go by contraries,’ don’t they say ? Come, we must put all that rubbish on one side, and be up and doing. Now, Harry, my firm belief is that there is no place where you will be so likely to do well as in the bush. It doesn’t matter a bit what employment you take up there. You may drive a bullock-team, mind sheep, hunt stock, or do 44
AfAKING UP THE SJIAG.
45
a hundred other things without lowering yourself in your own estimation, or in that of other people. Whereas, if once you turn billiard-marker (I could not help smiling at this suggestion, for in those days I hardly knew one end of a cue from the other), ostler, or barman anywhere in a town, you are done for.”
“What nonsense you talk, Summers. Do you really think I would take such billets as those ?” I asked, getting up on my high horse for a minute’s ride.
“ But I assure you, my boy, it is not nonsense. You don’t know anything about being stranded in a colony, or you would believe me more easily when I assure you I’ve known men of uncommon good family, men of education and culture, gentlemen in every sense of the word, who have been glad to sell oranges in the streets, or to black boots at one of these little hotels, or chop wood at a private house, to earn a shilling for their day’s food. I don’t mean to say that drink or dissipation has not had something to do with it; still, the fact remains. However, we need not expect anything of that sort in your case. At the same time you’ll look the situation straight in the face if you’re the boy I take you for, and you’ll just put your pride in your pocket, take off your swell clothes and dress as a bushman—in other words, as a labourer. You’ll have to do your travelling on foot, for the simple reason that there arc neither railroads nor stage-coaches in the country,
46
HAEEY TREVERTON.
and you have not money enough to buy a saddle and bridle, much less a horse.”
“ Well, I’m game to do all that,” I said, rather liking the prospect of starting off on foot to seek my fortune. “ What next ?”
“You will have to carry a blanket at one end of a strap, and a change of linen neatly done up in a bundle at the other. These things will balance each other when slung over your shoulder, and make what we call a 1 swag.’ Are you game for that part of the performance ? ”
“Yes, I am,” I answered stoutly.
“ Well done, old man ! I’m glad to see you have plenty of pluck in you. I have not minced matters, and I suspect you are the right sort, and determined to make the best of whatever turns up. Now, I’ll tell you what I propose you should do. A friend of mine will, I think, give you a letter of introduction to a settler named Fielder, who has a large farm about sixty miles up country. You will walk that distance, and present your letter: the result will be, I trust, that you will be admitted into the family circle, and in due time become such a useful young man that Mr. Fielder may possibly give you twenty shillings a month as wages. It doesn’t sound much, does it ? But still, it’s a great deal better than nothing. When you have learned to be a good bush-rider, and can milk your twenty cows before breakfast, and shear some sixty sheep a
MJSt.ro Li OR AST OF w^
MAKING UP THE SWAG.' 47
day, your pay may perhaps be raised to three pounds a month. If you turn out a very smart lad indeed, it is quite within the bounds of possibility you may even get to be overseer, and draw as much as a hundred pounds a year. What do you think of the plan ? Have you courage to try it, and patience and pluck to carry it out ? ”
“ Well, I can but do my best ; anyway, I may safely promise that I will try and show you I am not unworthy of all the kindness and friendship you are showing me,” for I was but young, and as full of genuine gratitude as of hope and faith in myself.
Summers looked pleased, but only said, “That’s a very neat speech, and does equal credit to your head and heart, as the reporters say. But, as a matter of fact, the kindness, up to date, has only consisted of giving you a small quantity of food and a great quantity of good advice. As regards the friendship, old man, I hope this is only the beginning of it. Now we'had better put sentiment on one side and proceed to business. Turn out your box, and let us see if we can find any suitable clothes for your journey.”
I jumped up with alacrity, and in a few minutes the floor was strewn with all sorts of clothes, the greater portion of which Summers threw on one side with very little ceremony. At last he selected some which appeared to be what he had been looking for.
48
HARR V TRE VER TON.
“ Moleskin trousers, right; billycock hat, right again; coloured cotton shirts, very userul; strong boots, and not too new either. Capital. What lots of socks and handkerchiefs! Well, I suppose you had better take a few of each, but we must not give you too much to carry; now we only want a blue serge shirt—-a ‘jumper’they call it here—which I can spare you, and a blanket.”
“ Here is a good rug at the bottom of the box, if that will do.”
“The very identical thing; and now let us make up the swag, and then you will see, or rather feel, what you have to carry.”
In a few minutes the rug was neatly rolled up, the linen packed in a little valise of Summers’, with some straps to make all secure. I seized the bundle and flung it over my shoulder, anxious to know what a “ swag ” felt like.
“Now that is what I call an uncommonly neat swag,” said Summers, walking round me to obtain a full view. Does it seem pretty well balanced ? ”
“Yes, I should say it balances very well, and it’s not so heavy after all.”
“ Oh, it will be quite heavy enough by the time you have carried it twenty miles.
“ Now we must have two small bags for tea and sugar, and a larger one for damper; matches you can carry in your
MAKING GT TIKE SI FAG.
49
pouch, and be careful not to run short of them. We must not forget a tin pannikin, which you will carry on your belt. You will soon find out that a good fire and a pannikin of tea—hot, strong, and sweet—are absolute necessaries when one has to pass a night in the bush. And now, old man,” said Summers, looking round the room, every table and chair of which was strewn with “ properties,” “ I really think you are about fixed up.”
I thought so too, bearing in mind I had to be my own pack-horse. It is true there were many little articles among the rejected heaps which I felt loth to part with, for boys have more sentiment at the bottom of their hearts than they allow others to perceive. My eyes fell on one or two things which I specially remembered had been made for me by loving and far-away hands, and it was almost like saying good-bye again to home, to leave those keepsakes behind me. But I would not for worlds have let even the good-natured Summers know the feelings which were tugging at my heartstrings, and it was with a fine air of indifference that I agreed with him that we had selected all necessaries. It was further settled that my box of clothes should be left in Summers’ charge ; and now I was actually ready to start on my adventures, feeling delightfully like a boy in a book—in real bush costume, and in the lightest possible marching order.
I cannot say that the prospect of tramping alone, and
4
5°
HARRY TRE VER TON.
through unknown country, as an Australian swagsman, was altogether inviting; still there was a tinge of romance about it, and as I had no alternative I wisely determined to pluck up courage, put my pride in my pocket (as Summers had suggested), and battle through all difficulties and trials as well as I was able. These resolutions were much strengthened as I reflected on the pleasure it would afford my dear parents if they could hear that I was working my way, patiently and creditably, towards success and independence in this far-distant Australian land.
CHAPTER V.
ON THE TRAMP.
RUMMERS would not let me start the very next day, as I wished, saying I must not only wait to get my land-legs, so to speak, after the long voyage, but urging also the necessity of getting someone to give me a proper letter of recommendation to Mr. Fielder. So I waited until a week had passed from the morning when I first saw my boyish but true-hearted friend on the beach, and then—Heaven knows with what secret misgivings, but a stout outward bearing— announced that I really meant to take to the road the very next morning.
Summers laughed, and declared I expressed myself like a footpad, or, as he phrased it, a bushranger; however, he was too practical to encourage me in a useless delay, so we spent the very last evening of my stay under his friendly roof in packing up the few things to take, and the many to leave. In order to be sure that I possessed all requisites for my tramp, Summers insisted on what he called a dress rehearsal that last evening. As I stood before him all ready, with my swag over my shoulder, and even a stout stick in my hand, 51	4-2
52
HARRY TREVERTON.
he looked me carefully over, and at last declared that I looked like a bushman out of a band-box, but that I would doubtless improve after a day or two of dust and sunburning.
Next morning we were both dressed by daylight, and as Summers had kindly offered to see me a few miles on my road, we ate our last and hasty breakfast together, and then started.
It was the end of summer, late in the month of March. Everything looked dry and dusty, and what grass there was seemed fairly burned off the surface of the ground by the fierce sun. The weather, as is usual at that time of year, was hot and trying during the greater part of the day, but as we left the cottage in the early morning the air felt delightfully cool and fresh. Summers took the swag, and, swinging it lightly over his left shoulder, remarked that I would have had quite enough of it by the time I reached my journey’s end.
We walked gaily out of Sandtown without meeting a single person. Our road for the first few miles lay through a dreary, sandy country, very different-looking from the Australia I had pictured to myself. The trees had been cut down for firewood, and I am bound to confess the aspect of the road was desolate to the last degree.
After walking steadily for about five miles, the track be-
ON THE TRAMP.
53
came firmer and harder, the trees increased in size and number, the grass-trees, or “ black-boys ” as they are commonly called, grew in profusion on each side of the road, while the parrots, break-o’-day boys, and other birds made merry overhead, and appeared to rejoice in the beauty of the morning.
We had gradually dropped into silence as we trudged steadily along. I knew what must come directly, and yet it was with a start of surprise, as if his words had been wholly unexpected, that I heard Summers say at last, “ And now, Harry, my boy, it must be good-bye.”
The dear old fellow did not like the parting any more than I did, but he was kind and considerate to the last, and did his best to speak in his usual cheery tone as he slung the swag over my shoulders, adjusting it carefully, and saying, “You will have a good hard road for the rest of your journey, but there’s twenty-five miles more to cover before you reach the Traveller’s Rest. Drop me a line when you are settled. Keep up your pluck. Take my blessing with you if you think it will be any use to you, and good-bye.”
As I pressed his hand in both my own, I tried to thank him for all his kindness and friendship, but the words would not come. I felt the tears smarting in my eyes, and to hide them I had to turn abruptly away and rush along the road, as though I were running away from my only friend ; nor
54
HARRY TREVERTON.
was it many minutes before I found myself absolutely alone in the great Australian forest.
The fresh beauty of the morning—for it was still early— the novelty of the scene, and the sharp exercise soon restored
ALONE.
me to a more cheerful frame of mind, and onward I trudged, covering mile after mile, without meeting a soul. I well remember that what appeared strangest of all, where all seemed strange, was the severe monotony of the scene. I constantly beheld, as it were, the same trees, the same blackboys, the same dwarf-palms; and as I ascended one hill and
ON THE TRAMP.
55
descended the other—for the ground was full of undulations at that part—I appeared to be travelling in a dream, and to get no farther on my journey. That was only, however, so far as outward appearances were concerned, for there were other indications which led me to quite a different conclusion. I began to feel hot, tired, and thirsty. The swag pressed more and more heavily on my weary back as each long quarter of an hour passed, and my brisk, jaunty steps gradually slowed down to a very poor pace indeed. As I surmounted each hill, I looked wistfully to the bottom of the next, in the hope of seeing something new. But no ; the same monotonous “ bush ” spread round me on every side.
After travelling thus alone for about four hours, I was indeed rejoiced to hear the tinkle of a bell, and to see the next moment several horses in hobbles feeding a little way off the track, where the grass looked green, though coarse. Hardly had I passed them when I came upon a camp of teamsters enjoying their midday meal. I quickened my pace, and was soon standing before them asking for a drink of water. They were a rough-looking lot, very dirty, and with long, unkempt beards; but one of them answered me promptly, and he spoke both civilly and kindly.
“ Take a drink of tea, mate; it will be better for you than cold water,” he said, handing me a quart pannikin.
56 HA JR Ji Y TEE VER TON.
I thanked him, put the can to my mouth, and drained every drop of what tasted to me the purest nectar. It was certainly the biggest drink I had ever taken in my life, and I felt that I had never known what a good beverage tea was until that moment.
“ Have a bit of something to eat, mate,” said the same man, handing me a lump of damper and some cold boiled mutton.
The food did not look very inviting, and I was much too hot and tired to be able to enjoy anything so solid, but I made a pretence of eating some as the best means of showing my appreciation of the proffered kindness, and after another long drink of tea took my swag to the shade of one of the carts, placed it under my head before lying down, and in five minutes was as sound asleep as it was possible for a weary lad to be.
I was awakened by the noise of the horses’ bells and the loud voices of the teamsters as they harnessed up for a fresh start.
“ You’ve had a good sleep, mate,” remarked one of the men as he walked up to the cart under which I was lying, to put away his traps.
“Yes,” I said,'rousing up with some effort; “ I must have slept a long time. What o’clock do you think it is ? ”
“Well, by the sun I should judge it to be about half-past
ON TNE TRAMP.
57
three, and if you are going to the Traveller’s Rest, it will take you all your time to reach there before dark. It’s sixteen miles from here.”
“Then if you’ll kindly give me another drink I’ll make a start.”
Having taken another long pull at the pannikin of tea, I slung my swag once more over my shoulder, wished the men good-day, and started along the road, but I had scarcely gone a dozen yards before one of them shouted to me, “ Hi, you don’t want to go back to Sandtown, do you ? That’s the road you came this morning ! ”
I retraced my steps, but the bush was all so exactly alike that had it not been for the friendly warning, I should probably have gone back many weary miles of the same ground I had already travelled over without recognising it. Sixteen miles to walk before nightfall seemed rather a serious matter, especially as I was already feeling tired, but I determined to do it if possible. And on I marched, up hill and down hill, past the never-varying trees, black-boys, and scrub, all exactly alike.
After walking for about three hours I began to feel terribly tired, and my swag appeared to weigh at least three times as much as when I started. The sun, too, was getting very low, and the thought that I should be in total darkness soon after it set, nerved me for another spurt.
5§
HARRY TREYERTOH.
But this better pace did not last long. Gradually it slackened, and each step became slower and more difficult, and the swag grew heavier every moment. I ached all over, and as darkness came on realized the fact that I was done up. I sat down wearily on a log on the right-hand side of the road, and determined to keep that fact in mind, or I might easily make another mistake and again start backwards.
The forest had become silent as death—a silence only broken at long intervals by the melancholy cry of some strange bird. How I longed for some familiar sound! The rumble of cartwheels would have seemed as sweetest music! But no, s lence and solitude reigned supreme, and once more I felt myself a stranger in a strange land indeed.
After sitting for awhile I roused up, got out my matches, pulled some dry fibres hanging down from one of the grass-trees, or black-boys, and soon made a blaze. Abundance of first-rate firewood was strewn around me in every direction, and I soon made a splendid fire, which roared and crackled, breaking pleasantly the terrible silence, and lighting up the surrounding forest till it looked like a fairy scene.
This new aspect of things was certainly more cheering, and I now felt able to collect a further supply of rushes,
ON THE TRAMP.
59
which I used for a bed, placing my jacket under my head for a pillow and pulling my rug over me for warmth. I stretched myself out before the fire and tried to cat some of the food which had been rolled up in my rug, but my throat felt so dry that I actually could not swallow a morsel. The tea and sugar bags and my pannikin were lying near, but unfortunately they were quite useless without water. I could not keep myself from speculating as to what sort of a drink I would take if I could only have it for the asking. Should it be iced champagne (a beverage I knew very little of personally), claret, beer, lemonade, ginger-pop, or what ? Half a gallon of pure, cold water from the well in my father’s yard would have been the order, and I would willingly have parted with one of my few remaining sovereigns—ay, all of them—for the luxury of such a draught. But thirsty as I was then, I was only so in the common acceptance of the term. Since then I have met men who have experienced such thirst that they would gladly have given all they possessed in the world, or even life itself, if they might only first have had a draught of such water as, under ordinary circumstances, they would have considered unfit for use.
Yes, I certainly thought I was very thirsty, and rather pitied myself as I lay, with my hands clasped together under my head, gazing up at the beautiful stars shining
6o
HARRY TREVERTON.
down through the boughs of the forest trees on me, and wondering whether I should be able to sleep. Even as I wondered and mused the surrounding realities faded away, and I slipped over the border of sleep into the land of dreams.
CHAPTER VI.
A NIGHT IN THE BUSH.
J MUST have been sleeping for some hours, when I was awakened by the most fearful howls it is possible to imagine. Could I have dreamt such hideous sounds ? No ! There they are again! A long, melancholy howl, and then a terrible chorus, as though a pack of wolves were within a hundred yards of me.
I am not ashamed to acknowledge that I felt very frightened, although I soon guessed the noise must be made by the dingoes, or native dogs, Summers had described to me. Still I did not know but what the brutes might take advantage of my isolated position to attack me, so I threw some more wood on the fire, armed myself with a stick, and determined, if necessary, to make a fight for it. As it turned out, I might have saved myself all this trouble, but I did not know then that the Australian native dog is about the most cowardly animal in existence.
The blazing fire had evidently scared them, for in less than ten minutes I heard the howling again, but this time a long way off. I threw my stick away, and after turning round and round before the fire to get warm all over, sat 61
62
HA Ji Ji Y ERE YER TO JY.
me down on my rush bed, pulled my rug over my shoulders, and wished for morning, though as yet it was probably not much past midnight. How quiet and solemn it was in that great forest 1 The stars still shone brightly, but, save the slight rustling of leaves, not a sound broke the silence.
By degrees I became drowsy, and lay down again, dozing off with a faint sort of resolution in my mind not to allow myself to go sound asleep again. After lying thus comfortably enough for some time, I fancied I heard a sort of bumpthump-bump, and as the noise grew louder and more distinct, I could also distinguish the creaking of wheels and the tread of several horses’ feet coming from the direction towards which I was travelling. Strangely enough, there was no crack of whip or driver’s voice to be made out. What could it mean ? Perhaps the teamster had been hurt, or his team had started without him while he was asleep! These thoughts passed rapidly through my mind, and as a cart drawn by three sleeping-looking horses came opposite to my fire, I shouted, “ Whoa 1 ”
The horses stopped at once. I walked over to the cart, and, climbing up by the wheel, looked into it, and saw, to my horror, a man lying, face downwards, on what appeared to be sacks of grain.
“ Hi, master! Wake up! ” I shouted—“ wake up ! ”
A NIGHT TN THE BUSH.
67
“ What’s up—what’s up ? ” he asked, in a thick, sleepy, •drunken voice.
“Wakeup, man! Wake up, or you’ll get hurt!” I cried, much relieved to find he was, at all events, alive.
The man slowly raised himself up on his elbow and glared at me. What a brute he looked as the firelight played on his besotted face, longhair, and ragged beard. “Yes, somebody ’ll be hurt directly! ” he muttered. “ Did you stop my horses ? ” he asked, savagely, and the words were hardly ■out of his mouth when he struck at me violently with his fist. Fortunately I was on the look-out, and, dodging the blow, jumped nimbly off the wheel into the road. “Yes, somebody ’ll be hurt directly! ” he repeated, with horrible oaths. “Any man as interferes with my horses is bound to be hurt! ” and to my horror the fellow scrambled out of the cart, but instead of alighting on his feet he fell heavily on his back. However, he managed to get up again pretty smartly, and, with a cart-whip in hand, gave chase to me.
I ran nimbly, for the fear of falling into the ruffian’s clutches took the stiffness out of my limbs and lent me fresh energy. I dodged round a black-boy, which he evidently did not see, as in making a straight course he fell clean over it, and then the language he made use of was, as the newspapers say, “unfit for publication.” Very much so, indeed ; it made my blood curdle to hear him. Unfortunately the 5—2
68
HARRY TREVERTON.
fall appeared to sober him somewhat, and to make him only the more determined to get hold of me.
I did not dare to run out of the range of the firelight for fear of losing it and myself at the same time, or I could soon have distanced him, so I dodged around trees, fallen logs, and black-boys, my pursuer keeping up a determined chase; and, although he was still too drunk to catch me, I began to feel very tired, and to wonder whether he intended to run himself sober.
At last a bright idea occurred to me. Dashing out on to the road, I picked up a stick and struck the leading horse a good sounding thump on the back. The result was just what I wished, for the team started off at a trot, and I had the satisfaction of seeing their drunken master run after them, shouting, “Whoa!” and swearing most fearfully. Happily none of his orders had any effect, for the horses were thoroughly frightened, and he had to chase them instead of me. By degrees the rumbling and creaking of wheels died away in the distance, and so did the savage oaths of the drunken teamster.
How thankful I felt to be able to sit down once more and rest myself, for the perspiration was fairly streaming off me, and my thirst had become something dreadful. My whole body trembled with the excitement I had gone through ; but instead of lying down again I wisely determined to keep
A NIGHT IN THE BUSH
69
awake for the rest of the night. As I sat, sadly enough, looking at the fire and longing for daylight, I fancied I heard footsteps approaching. Yes, decidedly footsteps, though drunken, uncertain ones. I hastily picked up my blanket and swag, ran a few yards up the road, and, taking up a position behind a large tree, cautiously peeped from behind it, watching and waiting for what was going to take place.
I had not long to wait before my drunken friend reached my fire. In place of a whip he now held a big stick, clubwise, in his hand, and I firmly believe that, had he caught me napping, my tramps and troubles would have been over in two minutes. I watched him carefully as he looked about, warmed himself, lit his pipe, and then walked away down the road again, swearing at the top of his voice that he would put my light out if ever he got hold of me.
It was with a feeling of intensest gratitude that I heard his footsteps die away in the distance, and reflected that I had probably escaped being murdered. Once more all was silent, and I longed to get back to the cheerful crackle and blaze of my fire. But I could not help dreading that the ruffianly teamster'might return, so I crouched down where I had been hiding behind the tree, pulled my rug once more over my shoulders, and after a while fell fast asleep.
When I woke the day was breaking; the gloom and silence of the night had passed away and given place to the merry
70
HARRY TREVERTON.
chirping of hundreds of birds. As there was no question, unfortunately for me, of breakfast before starting, I thought I had better take advantage of the cool morning hours, so I went back to the embers of my fire—looking white and wan in the early light, but still smouldering in a way very suggestive of a pannikin of nice hot tea—picked up my useless tea and sugar bags, and the brand-new pannikin, packed up my swag, and once more started along the road. It would be too much to say that my broken night’s rest had much refreshed me, but I felt very thankful that, such as it was, it had not ended in, for me, the sleep of death.
CHAPTER VII.
THE BUSH-FIRE.
WEARY’ footsore and dirty, I trudged along the dusty track, wondering whether it could be possible that I had passed the Traveller’s Rest; but as I had been told that the public-house stood close by the roadside, it comforted me to reflect that even in my dazed and stupid state I could hardly have missed it.
When I had walked about three miles the sun rose, and I felt more done up and thirsty with each step after that. In fact the thirst was becoming most distressing, when suddenly I heard a dear familiar sound which promised food, water, rest, everything I most needed! Yes, the loud discordant crow of an old cock sounded as sweetest music to my ears and helped me to quicken my pace until I came to a clearing in the forest, in the centre of which stood a cottage.
Here was the Traveller’s Rest at last, and never was signboard more appropriately named! There was the traveller himself, rudely depicted with a bundle on his back, and holding out a pannikin, but I did not linger to admire this work of art, and lost no time in knocking at
72
HARRy 7 RR VER TOR.
the door, which was opened by a bare-footed girl with unkempt hair and bleared eyes. I was too parched with thirst for an unnecessary word, and walked past her into an empty kitchen with a huge fireplace. I threw down my swag and asked for a drink of water. The girl seemed as taciturn as I was, for she merely pointed first to a pannikin and then to a bucket, and told me to help myself. I needed no second invitation, but, dipping my pannikin into the water, drank again and again until my thirst was satisfied.
“ My word ! but you were pretty dry,” remarked the damsel. “Yes,” I replied, “this is the first drink I have had since yesterday afternoon, and, what made matters worse for me, I was chased about the bush in the middle of the night by a drunken teamster.”
“That must have been Red Tom,” said the girl; “he left here last night about eleven o’clock pretty well drunk, and took a bottle of rum with him for the road. It was a good job you were able to give him the double, or you would not have been here now.”
* Indeed, and why not ? ”
“ Well, it’s just this; when Red Tom’s drunk he’s mad; and when he’s mad, he’d just as soon kill a man as not. One day he was on the spree here, and he and another chap had a fight; they both tumbled down, and whiles
THE BUSH-FIRE.
73
they was on the ground Tom bit t’other chap’s ear right off and then chewed it up; my word, but he is a brutebeast when he’s in drink ! ”
“Yes, I am very thankful I did not fall into his clutches ; and now tell me if I can have a room here and some breakfast.”
“Yes, but it’s only just six o’clock, and the missus ain’t up yet. You can go into that bedroom if you like, and have a wash and a lie down; ” and the girl pointed to a door opening into a lean-to. The room was small but fairly clean, with a little bedstead, a chair, a tin basin full of water on a box, and a broken looking-glass for its sole furniture. I caught sight in the latter of a face besmeared with dust and charcoal and a pair of bloodshot eyes, which I hardly recognised as my own property.
A good wash was nearly as enjoyable as the big drink in the kitchen had been, and I can never forget the relief of taking my boots off. I threw myself on the bed, closed my aching eyes, and slept till the girl called me for breakfast. The landlord and his wife were by this time up and about, and they invited me very civilly to join them at their meal, though both they and their children regarded me, I could see, with some curiosity.
The breakfast was plain but ample, and I did full justice to a dish of capital mutton chops and several eggs—my
74
NARRY TREVERTON.
first meal for more than twenty-four hours, with a tramp of thirty miles into the bargain.
“ I suppose you’ll not be going any farther to-day ? ” remarked the landlord as we rose from breakfast. “Anyhow, I wouldn’t advise you to try it; the land-wind has set in, and we shall have a regular scorcher before the day is out.”
“ No, I shall not go on to-day,” I replied, as I walked to the door and met a blast from the terrible east wind, which was blowing clouds of dust along the road and carrying scraps of paper, straws, and dead leaves high into the air, whilst the fowls stood in the shade of the veranda with their beaks wide open, gasping with the heat.
Presently the landlord came into the room, and, giving his wife the key of the bar, told her not to draw a drop more liquor for any one without his sanction, as he could smell a bush-fire, which must be travelling with the wind in the direction of the homestead. The good woman looked uneasy at this piece of news, and I asked her if she anticipated any danger.
“Well, yes; there is always danger,” she answered, “when a land-wind is driving a bush-fire in front of it. But we are pretty clear of the bush here, and the traffic has worn away the grass about the premises. We’re obliged to shut up the bar, for it wouldn’t do to have the sawyers and
THZ BUSH-FIRE.
75
other men drunk, as it’s more than likely there will be plenty to do before night, and we shall want them all to lend a helping hand, maybe.”
The anticipations of the good woman were soon fully realised, for in about an hour’s time two teamsters came driving up to the inn fast as Jehus, and reported that
DRIVING FAST AS JEHUS.
they had been compelled to throw their loads away on to the road and drive as fast as possible with empty carts to save their own and their horses’ lives. They said that the fire was racing along on each side of the road at the rate of several miles an hour, and would be with us in a very short time. Even as they spoke dense volumes of black smoke came drifting towards us, making the atmosphere thicker and hotter than ever.
76
HARRY TREVERTON.
We were all soon fully employed ; every bucket and tub was quickly filled with water from the well, and the men on the place cut down a quantity of green boughs with which to beat out any fire that might approach or be blown on to the homestead. Scarcely were our preparations completed when we heard the crackling and roaring of the flames, and in a few minutes we saw the fire running along the ground towards us. No wonder the teamsters had been obliged to drive for their lives! The flames, driven by the fierce east wind, came rushing along, licking up everything before them in their desolating course. Now and again, when a dead tree caught fire, the flames would crackle and roar with increased fury, creating a terrific blaze. Then perhaps the dry tendrils of a thickly-massed creeper would catch a flying spark, and the fire would sweep right up to the top of a high tree and then pass on, leaving it all black and smouldering.
The terrific roaring of the flames, the dense volumes of smoke, and the occasional crashing of timber, all tended to render the long hours of the night during which we watched and waited awful, but grand beyond the power of words to describe.
It was just before daylight when the terrible enemy came within our reach, slowly, indeed, at first, but with determined fury. Our little band of defenders had each
THE BUSH-FIRE.	77
armed himself with a big bough, and a stack of such boughs lay within easy reach. Owing to the timber having been cleared away in the vicinity of the place, the fiercest flames swept along on each side of us. But there was plenty of work to do, for as the wind drove the fire along every blade and twig of the scant vegetation caught light ; besides which, fragments of blazing bark, leaves which were one red glow, and even fiery boughs, were blown in our direction, and appeared to set the very ground they touched alight. The advanced guard of bushmen were there, however, ready to meet the foe, and, bush in hand, I joined their line, each man beating with desperate energy at the patches of flame running along the ground towards the little house. Sometimes the fire would resist all attempts in one particular spot to beat it out, and then its opponents would shout for help, and we all rushed to their aid, fighting a desperate battle amid clouds of dust and volumes of black smoke. Then when our united efforts had stopped the danger in that direction, it only needed a glance in another to see the tongues of flame licking up everything before them and gaining on us with frightful rapidity.
And so we fought on till the first sun-rays seemed to to have more effect in quenching the blaze than anything we had been doing, and there came a moment to pause
78
HARRY TRE YER TOM
and rest. The women and children had worked, in their way, as hard as we men had done in ours. All the time they brought us buckets and pannikins of water from the well, as well as fresh boughs from the stack in our rear. Indeed, without their help we must have fallen from suffocation and exhaustion.
At last the battle was over, but the blackened faces, singed hair and whiskers, and the laboured breathing and coughing of the men, told how sharp and fierce had been the struggle for even a narrow victory. Yes, it had been a terrible fight. With aching chests, parched throats, and scorched eyes, we at last returned to the house. The landlord and his wife were loud in their praises and thanks for the services we had rendered them, and gave practical expression to their gratitude by distributing food and beer in unlimited quantities. I tried a draught of beer, but it tasted warm and sickening, and I felt much too exhausted to take food ; so with several of the others I went off to the well, where we enjoyed delightful drinks of cold water, and cooled our heated heads in the horse-trough, regardless of the risk of a chill. However, there did not appear to be much danger of such a thing, for the heat was so intense that it seemed impossible to obtain relief for more than a few seconds.
We spent the rest of the long day in trying to cool
THE BUSH-FIRE.
79
BEATING WITH DESPERATE ENERGY THE PATCHES OF FLAME.
THE BUSH-FIRE.
8r
down, and to obtain a little fresh air, but both these objects were difficult of attainment, for the sun was hot, the fires round about us hotter still, and the land-wind drove us into the house, which felt hotter than all, for a batch of bread had just been drawn from the oven.
However, all things must have an end, and after the sun had gone down the land-wind moderated, and we were at last able to take some food and lie down, worn out with fatigue, yet thankful that we had escaped the worst consequences of so terrible a bush-fire and had still a roof over our heads.
6
SHINGLE-SPLITTERS’ yarns.
CHAPTER VIII.
WHEN 1 awoke next morning I felt as though some one had given me a good thrashing. My arms and legs were stiff, every bone in my body ached, and my eyes smarted painfully from the heat and smoke of the night before.
The landlord and his wife no doubt saw, as I sat at breakfast with them, that I was suffering from overexertion, for they kindly invited me to remain for another day as their guest. I gladly accepted the suggestion, for I was quite unfit for anything but the complete rest which the cooler state of the atmosphere now permitted. The land-wind had quite blown itself out, and the temperature, though still high, was no longer suffocating. In the afternoon I made a feeble attempt to do a little washing on my own account, but my barefooted friend, having detected me, promptly ordered me to “get out of that,” for she would do the bits of things for me, an offer I gratefully accepted.
Next day, after dinner, the landlord told me that he was going to drive to some splitters’ huts about fifteen miles off, but in the same direction in which I was
82
SHINGLE-SPLITTERS’ TARNS.
83
travelling, and added that I might have a seat in his spring-cart so far. I gladly availed myself of this chance of getting a lift along my road, and, packing up my swag, shook hands with the landlady, gave a small tip to my barefooted friend, and was soon jogging along the road towards Fielder’s Farm, still thirty miles off.
How different the bush looked that day! Nothing but blackness, smoke, and desolation in every direction; the only relief to the eye coming from a burning or smouldering log, which made a patch of lurid glow amid the surround-'ng gloom. Occasionally we saw a still-burning tree fall with a crash to the ground, or heard a distant thud, which told that some forest giant had at last given in to the fire which had for forty-eight hours been eating out his hollow trunk. About eight miles from the inn we found ourselves obliged to drive round the two heaps of smouldering grain which the teamsters had flung out into the track in order to facilitate their escape, and a little farther on we suddenly seemed to emerge from the blackened and smouldering bush, and our eyes were once more gladdened and refreshed by the cool green of the shrub which formed the dense growth of the forest.
The remainder of the drive was pleasant enough, and at sundown we reached two small huts, standing a couple of hundred yards back from the track. A cheerful fire 6—2
84
HARRY TRE VER TON.
crackled and blazed in front of the sylvan-looking little dwellings, and several men sat or lounged near, some smoking, and one absorbed in reading a tattered bit of newspaper: these were the shingle-splitters.
They appeared very pleased to see the landlord, who had not only brought them a fresh supply of provisions, but a couple of bottles of beer, which were very soon opened, and we all fell to talking. The landlord—who never could remember my name — gave the assembled company to understand in a general way that I was a young chap just out from the old country, who had helped manfully to put out the fire at the Traveller’s Rest, and was now on his way to Fielder’s Farm.
“And how did the fire get started, gaffer?” asked a big bearded fellow, “teamsters, I suppose.”
“Yes,” answered the landlord, “two of them came driving into the yard with empty carts, and said they had chucked out their loads to save themselves.”
“Just so,” said the big man, “we saw these same two go by the day before the fire started, and I wouldn’t mind betting my bottom dollar that they never took the trouble to put their camp fire out before leaving that same morning. They knew right well what leaving your fire in means, all the same. It means a spark bouncing out, a blaze among the dry grass, and a fire that perhaps destroys thousands
SNINGLE-SPLITTERS' YARNS.
85
of pounds’ worth of property. Where would we have been if the fire had chanced to start to windward of us? Why, we should have lost, at the very least, a hundred pounds’ worth of shingles.”
Every one had something to say on the subject, but the conversation was soon interrupted by the call of “Tea-ho!” and we all gathered round the fire to partake of a regular bushman’s meal of tea, mutton, and damper. There must have been some one with a genius for cooking among the men, for the food, plain and even coarse as it was, could not have been better made. After tea pipes were lit, and the landlord produced a bottle; the tea-pannikins were hastily rinsed out and did duty as tumblers, and the conversation—much to my satisfaction—soon drifted back again to bush-fires. Many stories were told, but the one I found most interesting was of a teamster who on one occasion had left a certain town with a three-horse team and a cartload of general stores for a shopkeeper up country. He had also provided himself with a bottle of brandy, and he acknowledged that he drank away at it until he went to sleep on the top of his load. That was the last thing he remembered, and the rest of the story is only conjecture. It is supposed that the horses, having no one to guide them, went off the road and upset the cart into an old sawpit. Some lucifer-matches and kerosine oil were among
86
HARRY TREVERTON.
the load, and no doubt they ignited, for only a heap of charred rubbish remained of the load, and the poor horses were burned beyond all recognition. Curiously enough, the drunken brute must have been pitched clear of all danger, and he did not even wake up until the mischief had been done. He had not even a scratch on him, but he lost his horses, cart, and a load of stores.
Another story was about a shepherd who had camped at the edge of a thicket for the night, and on the following morning made an early start to try to get through with his flock, numbering a thousand sheep. What must have been his horror when, about an hour afterwards, he perceived dense volumes of smoke following him. It was then too late to remember, with bitterest regret, that he had left his little camp fire still burning; nor was there any loophole of escape for his flock with a dense thicket all around the narrow track on which they were travelling.
In vain did he run to and fro, urging on with shouts and yells his frightened sheep. In vain did the poor collie bark himself dumb, and “work” till he was done up, and fain to lie on the ground. The roaring flames came on before the rising wind till he could not only feel their heat but their scorching tongues. Poor fellow! he had well-nigh exhausted himself in trying to save his flock, and now he had to make a supreme effort to save himself. As he ran
SinNGLE-SFLITTRRS’ YAXNS.
87
swiftly forward he gave one last look over his shoulder at his poor flock. They had rushed close together, as sheep always do when frightened, and were bleating with fear. In another instant they became a mass of struggling living flame, and in a few minutes there was roast mutton enough for an army. Fortunately the poor shepherd and his good dog escaped the fire, although they both nearly died of want of water and of exhaustion.
On another occasion a bush-fire broke out suddenly, and did so much damage to property that the settlers turned out in a body to investigate the cause, and try to find out and prevent its occurring again. After some searching they found the charred remains of three human beings and four small hoops, which had evidently belonged to a spirit-keg. A little enquiry led them to the conclusion that the remains were those of three men who, having become helplessly drunk, had gone to sleep in their hut, which a spark had set on fire; and so they had perished miserably, besides doing an immense amount of injury to their neighbours’ property.
The best story, however, was told by the man with the large beard who answered to the name of Jack. I will try and repeat it as nearly as possible in his own words.
CHAPTER IX.
JACK’S YARN.
“'^'ALKING about bush - fires reminds me of a black fellow named Bob, who was ‘wanted’ by the police’ and used to come to my hut and tell me and my mate that if we did not give him baccy and grub, we might expect a bush - fire to come along some fine day when we least expected it. Now, me and my mate, Bill Smithers, had been working hard splitting posts and rails, and a fire would have swept at least a hundred and fifty pounds’ worth of work away, if it had chanced to come on us unawares, as the stuff was lying about all over the place.
“You see this chap Bob was an awful scoundrel, and was ‘ wanted ’ for a murder, which happened this way.: Bob was one of those half-civilised blacks who would do anything for a drink of grog or a bottle of colonial wine, and he’d just carry on according to the number of glasses he had taken. If he’d only had a glass or two, he’d perhaps run his spear through some woman’s leg by way of a lark; if he was about half drunk, he’d run her through the thigh; but if he was quite drunk, nothing short of murder would satisfy him.
88
JACK'S YARN.
89
“Well, one day Bob and some friends of his were at one of their bush camps, when a half-caste girl, named Kitty Bell, joined them. She was a fine looking girl, had been brought up mostly with white people, could talk English as well as I could, and had a regular place of service, but now and again the black blood would show up, and nothing would suit her but a run in the bush along with her old mother and the other natives. This time Kitty had not been long in the camp before she pulls out a bottle of rum she’d bought with her wages, and they had one drink all round, and then another. Bob, as usual, considered he had a right to a double share, so when the bottle came to him the second time, he just polished off the lot, and then Kitty let him have the length of her tongue. In a few minutes the grog and the slanging together began to take effect on my gentleman, who got hold of his spear in one hand, and Kitty’s hair in the other. Before any one could move, he had jerked her head back and driven the spear right into her throat, working it up and down like the piston of an engine, till the poor girl fell dead.
“ I suppose he did not reckon much would come of it, as he’d killed several women and had escaped scot free, for the other natives were too much in terror of the scoundrel to round upon him. However, he had made a mistake
9°
NARRY TREVERTON.
this time, for the girl’s master and mistress came to hear of the murder, and took out a warrant against Master Bob. One fine day a white policeman rides up to him and holds a revolver to his head, while the native bobby who had tracked him down, clapped a chain round his neck, and marched him off to gaol.
“Well, you bet, he felt a bit uncomfortable, for he says to the policeman, trying to grin, but looking rather anxious all the time, ‘You think-um * white fellow hang-um mine?’
“‘Only one time hang-um you,’ says the policeman, ‘and then let-um you go.’
“ I suppose Bob didn’t quite see the joke, and came to the conclusion that to be hanged even once would be once too often, for he did not ask any more questions. They got him safe to gaol and locked him up, but when the funny policeman went to give his prisoner some breakfast next morning, he found nothing in the cell but a bit of a hole under the door-sill, and a heap of earth thrown back where our friend Bob must have burrowed himself out, for all the world like a cony. Any way, he was gone, clean and clever.
“There was a row then, you know! Every policeman on that station reckoned he’d been insulted by this fellow getting away from under their very noses, and they vowed
*The natives of Western Australia always add “um” to the verb.
JACK’S YARN.
9i
he should be taken again before the week was out. But this was easier said than done; they went out day after day, week after week, and month after month, till they got disheartened, and their horses knocked up, when I believe they received orders to lie by and let matters cool down a bit.
“Yes, Bob was one too many for the police for a while. He and his woman used to keep to themselves; one day he’d be here, and on the very next twenty or thirty miles off, but he had some narrow escapes. One day he was up a tree when a policeman rode right underneath him, and another time a police horse shied at the very bush under which he was lying. The brute had a better nose than the rider, and knew the scent of a black fellow, but the policeman just dug the spurs into the animal and went on, little thinking that the very man he’d ridden hundreds of miles after was lying hidden within a few feet of his horse’s nose. It was uncommon lucky for Master Bob that the white police were out alone that trip. A native tracker would have made short work of finding the man they were after both of those times. Now you see, mates, it was just while this game was going on that my gentleman would come down and do his cadging, and as I tell you, one day he thought he’d not got quite enough, and began to talk about bush-fires. My mate got savage.
92
NARRY TREVERTON.
and told him he’d put the police on to him, but the scoundrel laughed in our faces and said he knew every police-horse’s track in the district, and that not one had been after him for two moons.
“‘Policeman fool too much,’ Bob would say; ‘walkabout, walk-about all day; night time walk-about, can’t catch-um mine. My word, horse very near kill-um; too much tired. Policeman near dead ; too much walk-about walk-about. Nothing catch-um Bob ; nebber catch-um mine, policeman fool too much.’ ”
“Why didn’t you take the rascal yourself, Jack, and hand him over to the police?” asked one of the splitters.
“Well, we didn’t do it because we hadn’t so much as a bit of rope on the place, and we didn’t exactly fancy having to march the ruffian a matter of forty mile, with only the hair of his head to hold him by. No, we did better than that, as you shall hear presently. Matters had been going on like this for about three months, when one evening a rough-looking chap walked up to our hut, threw down his swag, and asked leave to shake down by the fire for the night. Of course we made him welcome and gave him some damper.
“Next morning the stranger followed me and my mate to where we were splitting, and sat on a log for a good while, talking and watching us work. At last he says,
JACK’S YARN.
93
‘If you’ve got a spare maul and a few wedges I’ll just try my hand on one of these logs.’ So we handed them over to him, and in a few minutes he had opened up the log, and was knocking out the rails in first-class style. By the time we went to dinner he had quite as many to show as Bill or I.
“‘You seem pretty much at home with the maul and wedges,’ says I to him as we were having a bit of dinner.
“‘Yes,’ said he, ‘I’ve split a few thousand posts and rails in my time, and as I feel a bit footsore I don't mind if I spend a few days with you, and I’ll guarantee that if you and your mate will open up the logs I’ll split them fast enough to double the number you are now serving.’
“‘Very good,’ says I; ‘and what wages will you want ? ’
“‘Well, you see, I’m not very particular about wages; in fact I don’t want any. Perhaps you and your mate might do me a good turn some day.’
“‘That depends,’ says Bill, ‘upon what sort of a turn it might be.’
“‘Now look here, lads,’ says the stranger, ‘I’ve just come along here to meet a very dear friend. I’ve a nice chain and locket for him, and, my word, we shall hug each other when we meet! ’
94
HARRY TREVERTON.
“‘This is some escaped lunatic,’ thinks I, and I could see by Bill’s face that he was of the same opinion.
“‘Does this friend o’ yourn know you’ll be here to meet him ? ’ asks Bill, very serious-like, and staring the stranger hard in the face.
“‘No, poor fellow; I just want to give him a little surprise.’
“‘As mad as a March hare,’ thinks I to myself. ‘And what might your friend’s name be ? ’ I asked him.
“ ‘ My friend’s name,’ said he, looking round cautiously, speaking the while in a very low tone, ‘ is Bob, and mine is Bobby.’
“We were surprised above a bit, but, mind you, it wasn’t so bad to have a policeman for a bush-mate as a madman, so we made a bargain. He was to work for us just as if he was on wages, and when Bob turned up we was to help to take him.
“ The bobby was as good as his word, and worked as hard as cither of us, till a fortnight had passed away, when Bob’s woman put in an appearance, and after watching us for awhile went off again, when we told our new mate who she was, and that Bob would probably be at camp directly to cadge for some food.
“ * All right,’ says he ; ‘ now look here, mates, if the fellow gets one yard start of us we shall be done for.
JACK'S YAK AT
95
Keep cool, watch my game, and if I’m not very much mistaken we shall have him by the heels safe enough before he’s many hours older.’
“ Sure enough, in about half an hour my gentleman marches into the camp with half a dozen spears in his hand, a dowark* in his belt, and a kangaroo skin cloak over his shoulders.
‘“Hullo, Bob!’ says I, ‘policeman nothing catch-um you?’
“‘Policeman nothing catch-um mine,’ says he, sitting down on one of the logs that was ready for splitting; ‘ me big fellow hungry, me want-um grub.’
“ I looked over at the policeman, but he was hammering away at his wedges as if to save his life, and took about as much notice of the nigger as if he had been a chip of wood. By-and-bye he takes up one of the rails and began spanning it with his hand as if he was measuring it.
“‘I say, Jack, these rails is not full length,’ he calls out.
‘“They measure nine feet, anyhow,’ says I, a bit sulkylike, maybe.
“‘You mustn’t tell me that,’ says he, shaking his head very knowing-like.
“‘But I do tell you so,’ says I, ‘and I’ll bet you ten shillings I’m right.’
*A flat piece of wood, oblong in shape, used for throwing the spear, sometimes called a “throwing-stick.”
96
HARRY TREVERTON.
“‘Done with you,’ he sings out; ‘I’ll take you up. Just bring the two-foot rule, will you?’
“ So we started measuring, first one log and then the other, as we went along, till we came to the log where Bob was sitting, when the policeman says, ‘Here, Jack, give me the rule, I’ll measure this one;’ so he lays the rule along it; two, four, and—Bob’ says he, as he got hold of the nigger by the hair with both hands.
“Well, mates, such an up and down tumble with the fellow you never saw. He jumped and kicked and fought and bit just like a madman, till I really thought he’d ha’ got away from the three of us, and I expect the policeman began to think so, too, for he put his hand inside of the breast of his shirt, pulled out a pair of handcuffs, and hit Master Bob a crack on the head that would have killed a white fellow on the spot. However, it only put Master Bob to sleep like for a few minutes, and when he came round he found a chain and padlock round his neck and his hands behind his back, with a pair of handcuffs on his wrists.
“ To make a long story short, we took Bob to gaol; he was tried, convicted of wilful murder, and hung.’’
“ How often ? ” asked the witty man of the audience.
“ Only once,” replied Jack, grimly, “ but it was often enough to put him past murdering helpless women and children, and threatening to burn up honest men’s property.”
GOT HOLD OF THE NIGGER WITH BOTH HANDS.
55
JACK’S YAKN.
99
“That’s a very good yarn, Jack,” remarked the landlord; •“now we’ll just have another little nip all round, a smoke, and then turn in.”
In half an hour’s time every man lay on the ground, rolled up in his rug, and all was silent save the crackle of the fire and the soughing of the south wind, as it murmured pleasantly overhead among the forest trees.
CHAPTER X.
DISAPPOINTMENT.
“ J^ OW ®en’ lads, turn out, if you don’t want the sun to burn your eyes out!”
I looked up from under my blanket and saw big Jack stalking about, rousing up the sleepers; but there certainly did not appear to be much danger from the sun, as the day was only just breaking. However, Jack’s threat appeared to have the desired effect, and the bushmen unrolled themselves from their rugs and blankets and began to dress. In most instances this appeared to consist of the very short and simple process of putting on their boots and hats. Others, more fastidious, joined me in a good wash out of a bucket first, and then we all sat down to breakfast.
How bright and pleasant everything seemed as we lounged around our camp fire, the smoke from which was curling upwards in the still morning air, sending forth a sweet incense from the “black-boy” resin and the eucalyptus leaves. The group of splitters, with their different gaycoloured rugs hung over branches, made a background which gave animation and colour to a perfect picture of Australian forest life.
.too
DISAPPOINTMENT.
ioi
Yes, all looked very pleasant, but it was only early morning time, and the heat and burthen of the day was yet to come; for my share of such burthen I had yet to tramp another fifteen miles of weary road before I should find myself at my journey’s end. In an hour’s time my good friend the landlord had shaken hands with me, mounted into his spring-cart, and trotted off, “ homeward bound.” The splitters had gone to their work in the forest, and I was once more marching along the road with my swag over my shoulder, in the direction of Fielder’s Farm.
After travelling about ten miles or so I observed an improvement in the country; the forest became less dense, grass — or, properly speaking, a white, dried-up looking herbage—took the place of scrub, and graceful wattle-trees grew here and there, whilst a large flock of white cockatoos sailed over-head, with their crests up, startled at the sight of a stranger. I thought them very beautiful, but the screeching chorus they set up was deafening, and as long as I was in sight they only alighted for a moment on a bough to start off again immediately with discordant
yells of alarm.
A little farther on I met a wild-looking old man, wearing a large slouch hat over a head of the longest imaginable hair. The crook in his hand and the sheep-dog at his
102
HARRY TRE VERTON.
heels proclaimed him at once to be the shepherd of the flock which I saw spread out over the hillsides, grazing, and making pleasant music with their bells.
“ Good morning, shepherd; can you tell me how far it is to Fielder’s ? ” I asked.
“Fielder’s is about six miles from here, mate, but if you are not in a hurry you may as well come to my hut and have a drop of tea and a bit of grub. It’s getting too hot for the sheep to feed, so I’ll lay them up.”
Yes, it was certainly getting warm, and the invitation to the drop of tea (which probably meant a couple of quarts), sounded inviting ; so I gladly accepted the shepherd’s offer, and the next moment he placed his fingers to his lips and blew a long shrill whistle, which was at once answered by a chorus of bleating from the scattered flock.
“Now, Jack, old man,” said he, speaking to his dog, “go behind and fetch ’em in; and work steady, old man, work stea-a-a-dy.”
The good dog looked up at his master with an intelligent human expression in his beautiful eyes, and after apparently getting a still more exact idea of what was expected of him from this gaze, trotted quietly off to obey orders.
“ That’s as fine a dog as ever worked a flock of sheep,” said the shepherd as we left the road and struck off in
DISAPPOINTMENT.
103
the direction of the hut, which had been built by the side of a dismal-looking swamp.
“Yes, he looks like a clever dog,” I assented, turning my head to watch the collie’s intelligent carrying out of his master’s orders to “ work steady.”
“ And so he is ; look here, mate, a man as owns a dog like that, and a set o’ bells like them on my flock, is worth a hextra twenty pun a year to any master as knows the valley o’ good shepherding, aint ’e now ? ” asked my new friend, as eagerly as though the increased wage depended entirely on my opinion and answer.
Of course I assented warmly, though a more ignorant opinion was never expressed ; and we walked on amicably towards the hut, which was not far off I gladly sat down on the shepherd’s “ bunk,” or rude bedstead, whilst he hospitably busied himself preparing the dinner, which consisted of fried chops, tea and damper. We had hardly begun to eat with our excellent “bush” appetites, before the flock came into camp and settled themselves quietly in little groups beneath the trees, whilst Jack, having so well discharged his duty, wras rewarded with a good dinner.
I remained with the shepherd for several hours, during which time he talked incessantly, evidently glad to have the opportunity of hearing the sound of his own voice. He was anxious for me to remain as listener, but I declined
104
NATTY TRE KEATON
the invitation to shake down with him till next day, and started again in the cool of the afternoon.
I had not walked far before I came to the brow of the hill, from which I saw a clear valley stretching far away in front of me, with farmhouses, barns, and haystacks dotted about here and there, giving evidence that I had done with the forest, and had reached an agricultural district.
As the sun was still high, and I had only four miles to travel, I sat me down to rest for a while. I am afraid that I also experienced a sort of dislike to presenting myself at Fielder’s in broad daylight, with my swag over my shoulder, so I determined not to make my appearance at his house until the sun had gone down. True, I had often taken walking excursions in the old country with my knapsack on my back, and never felt any reluctance to knock at a door and ask for a night's shelter or an hour’s rest; but those were tramps for pleasure, with pleasant companions, and very different from forced marches in search of employment. However, I need not have distressed myself on the score of appearance, for the few people I met as I plodded on after sundown took little or no notice of me beyond wishing me “good-day,” or giving me a civil answer when I asked if I were in the right track for Fielder’s. The fact was, a dusty, footsore
DISAPPOINTMENT.
i°5
lad, shy and sun-browned, and asking his way to a prosperous farmer’s homestead, was by no means an uncommon person to meet, and it spoke well for the morals of this little community that I was not suspected of a desire for possessing myself of anything except employment.
It was rapidly getting dark when I reached the place I had so hoped to make my future home, but -there still remained light enough for me to see that Mr. Fielder owned an uncommonly comfortable homestead, with stables and cowsheds behind a substantial though low-built dwelling house, and tops of haystacks and cornricks in the background.
With some trepidation I ascended a few steps, which led me on to a broad veranda edged with kerosene tins painted green, and serving as flowerpots. It all looked gay and pretty enough, no doubt, but my heart had sunk somewhere into my shoes, and no genuine tramp ever knocked with greater hesitation than I did at what I presumed to be the entrance door. The maid-servant bounced out so instantaneously that I was vexed with myself for starting awkwardly back, and I could not keep my voice as steady and clear as I desired while I asked if Mr. Fielder was at home.
“Yes, he is,” the damsel answered, snappishly; “but you
• io6
NARRY TREVERTON.
must go round to the kitchen,” and she slammed the door in my face.
I really think if the girl had boxed my ears I should not have felt so hurt or so indignant as I did when she said the word “ kitchen,” and I stood for a moment absolutely stupefied. Of course, it was very silly of me • I ought to have remembered that, to all appearance, I was nothing more or less than a common tramp. How could the girl possibly know that I was an English gentleman, and not an Australian swagsman ? I ought to have taken all this into consideration, but I did not. Why, I cannot tell you. Perhaps it was because I was poor and proud, weary and footsore, and altogether utterly wretched and miserable.
I turned from the door, descended the veranda steps, and was walking rapidly back to the road with the intention of sleeping in the bush, when a man walked past me, stopped suddenly, turned round, and asked, “ Who’s that ? ” “A traveller who wishes to see Mr. Fielder,” I replied. "Well, my name is Fielder; what do you want, my man ? ”
“And my name, sir,” I replied, “is Treverton. I have a note for you which concerns myself. If you have time to read it I will wait here for your answer,” and I gave him my letter of introduction.
DISAPPOINTMENT.
i°7
“ Have you had any supper ? ” he asked, hospitably, before he had even opened the letter.
“ No, sir, I have not.”
“Well, go round to the kitchen and tell the cook to give you some.”
The tone of the man’s voice was very different from that in which the servant had ordered me off, and as I could see that he meant kindly, I took no offence, but declined the invitation, saying I would rather wait until he had read the letter, which he proceeded to do without further parley.
In a few minutes he had finished it, and turned to where I was seated by my swag, saying, kindly enough,
“Come to the house, Mr. Treverton; you must excuse me for not asking you in before, but of course I could not know who you were till I had read my friend’s letter.”
Mr. Fielder was very kind and civil, and I congratulated myself on having been recommended to such a nice place; but, alas! my hopes were very soon to be dispelled. A good wash and change to the decent clothes I carried in my swag made me look much more presentable at the comfortable supper to which I was soon summoned; but, after the meal had ended, Mr. Fielder invited me to join him in his particular sheltered nook of the veranda, and, lighting his pipe, began of his own accord the conversation
io8
HARRY TREVERTON.
I had been longing for ever since I followed him up the steps. His first remark sounded encouraging enough.
“So you wish to learn to be a farmer, Mr. Treverton?”
• I WAS SEATED ON MY SWAG.
“Yes,” I replied; “I am sure I should like the work, and I’m not too old to learn, as you see. I’m young and fairly strong, and at all events I can promise to do my best.”
Mr. Fielder puffed away in silence for a moment, and I was beginning to fear I had said something hopelessly wrong and ignorant, when he showed me he had scarcely heard, and
DISAPPOINTMENT.
109
certainly not heeded, my neat little speech, by asking abruptly, but with a certain shrewd yet kindly twinkle of his eye,
“ Have you any means, my boy ? ”
“No, sir, I haven’t, not a penny of means,” I answered, desperately, but determined there should be no mistake about the matter.
“ Humph 1 I’m sorry for that, because, you see, my terms are fifty pounds a year, and unless you can afford to pay me that sum for the first two years I could not receive you into my house as what we may call a parlour boarder, nor would I wish to see you in the kitchen.”
“ Fifty pounds a year! ” I exclaimed ; “ why, I understood that you would probably teach me farming in consideration for such services as I might be able to render you.”
“And so I will,” Mr. Fielder said, nodding his head; “but you can hardly expect me to receive you into my house as a member of my own family, and provide you with board, lodging, and washing into the bargain.”
There was quite a pause, for I could not help seeing the fairness of his argument, but the short silence was broken by my exclaiming desperately, “ And this is what I have travelled sixty miles on foot for! It is very unfortunate for me, Mr. Fielder, that your friend did not tell me what your terms were before I left Sandtown. It would have saved me a long journey and a severe disappointment.”
IIO
HARRY TREVERTON.
“Oh, I do not suppose he knew anything about my terms,” Mr. Fielder said, rising from his chair, “ but as there really is nothing more to be said, I won’t keep you up now; I will see you again in the morning, of course, and between now and then I will turn things over in my mind and see if we can’t hit on any plan to put you in a good track.”
I thanked him warmly, for his manner was as kind as possible, although his words had dashed all my hopes to the ground, and saying “good night” went off to bed, wondering how many more miles I might have to tramp, and how it would all end. However, at my age it takes something more than uncertainty about the future to keep a man awake, and in a few minutes I was as sound asleep as though I had been Mr. Fielder himself, and master of all these fields and barns.
CHAPTER XI.
BACHELOR HALL.
'J'HE very first words Mr. Fielder said next morning when I came out to breakfast contained a kind and pressing invitation to stay with him for a few days and rest myself after my long journey. But I declined it, saying frankly that I felt quite rested and able to continue my travels, and I felt so terribly anxious to find work, that the only and the kindest thing he could do for me would be to advise in which direction those travels should be made. I added, rather superfluously, I dare say, that all I wanted was some respectable employment.
Mr. Fielder smiled, and I wondered afterwards whether my earnest emphasis on the word “respectable ” had struck him in the ludicrous light it did me later : as though I had meant to imply it was of no use his suggesting such employments as bushranging, thimble-rigging, or the like. At all events, the smile soon passed away, and he said, as gravely as even I could desire, “Yes, I can quite understand that a respectable place to live in will be necessary to a young fellow like you. I have been considering very carefully what would be your best plan. I think, if I were in your place, I would go on to ill
112
NARRY TRE VER TON.
a man called Reeves, who lives on his own farm about ten miles from this.”
“ May I ask if Mr. Reeves is a gentleman ? ” I asked ; “ and why you think I should suit him ? ”
“Yes,” Mr. Fielder replied, “Reeves is a gentleman and a bachelor; he could make a companion of you, and I really think you would suit each other very well.”
“Will you give me a letter of introduction to him?” I inquired, feeling as if I had no right to ask a favour of an utter stranger, and yet being very unwilling to walk into a strange house without such a missive.
“Of course I will,” my host cried, cheerily; “I shall just enclose the note you brought me, and add a few lines of my own, and that will make everything right as far as introducing you goes.”
We discussed the matter a little more in detail after breakfast, and the result of our conversation was that an hour later I had bidden Mr. Fielder adieu, thanked him most heartily for his hospitality, and, having shouldered my swag once more, was trudging along in the direction of “ Bachelor Hall,” as Mr. Reeves had called his farmhouse.
It was certainly discouraging, and woundingVone’s vanity, to be passed along from one farmer to another in this fashion, but there was no choice for me, and I could only hope my venture might prove more successful this time. So on I
BACHELOR HALL. 113
marched, not in very high spirits, but with my dogged determination to find respectable employment as clear and strong as ever in my boyish mind.
My journey lay that day through a district which appeared more or less in the hands of small farmers ; but as I travelled onwards the settlements became scarcer, until at last all signs of cultivation ceased, and I once more entered the monotonous and melancholy forest.
After walking about four miles through timber and scrub, I suddenly came upon a clearing in a pretty valley, on one side of which stood a small cottage, with the usual outhouses and hayrick in the background. This, then, must be my destination, I concluded, as I passed through the slip rails, and I was walking up towards the house when I perceived a little, grey-bearded old man sitting on the doorsteps busily employed in mending some clothes. As I approached, he evidently heard my footsteps, for he raised his head and stared at me over his spectacles.
I devoutly hoped that this miserable-looking specimen of antiquated humanity would not prove to be Mr. Reeves, but I thought it best to propitiate him lest he should turn out to be that gentleman. I therefore inquired as civilly as I could whether the master were at home ?
“Well, no, he ain’t, not just now,” replied the old fellow, “ he’s a-gone to look for some sheep as has been lost.”
8
114
HARRY TREVERTON.
It was a relief to find that' my fears had been groundless, for the man’s appearance and manners were decidedly crabbed^ but I persevered in my attempts to be genial and pleasant.
“ And when do you think he will be back ? ” I asked.
“Well, well, well, some people do ask silly questions,” said the old man, snappishly ; “ don’t I tell ye he’s a-gone to look arter lost sheep? and they’re cattle as take a deal o’ findin’ sometimes. Are you a-lookin’ for a job ? ”
“ I have a letter for Mr. Reeves,” I said, evading the question.
“ Oh, it’s a letter, is it ? Well now, p’r’aps it’s a werry important letter, but you can hand it over to me, and it’ll be right enough. But maybe it’s too consequential to be guv over to any one nor himself? Halloa, if that ain’t him a-comin’ through the rails! ”
I looked round and saw a middle-aged man, dressed in a pair of moleskin trousers and a coloured cotton shirt, with an old wideawake hat on his head, ride up to the steps of the cottage. The old grumbler led away the horse as soon as his master had dismounted, and I lost no time in taking off my hat and presenting my letter. Mr. Reeves opened and read it on the spot, and then, with a pleasant smile, held out his hand, expressing himself glad to see me.
Yes, this rough-looking man, dressed as a common labourer, was evidently a gentleman, and with the true instinct of one hastened to make me feel at home with him at once.
BACHELOR HALL.
'■5
“ And so you have walked all the way from Sandtown, Mr. Treverton ? Well, that shows you are not afraid of hard work, at any rate. Come in and sit down ; we shall have tea directly.”
I was delighted with my new friend; his manner was so genial and pleasant it was impossible not to feel attracted by
“now then, dick, tea as soon as you like.”
it. We entered a small room, very scantily furnished, but scrupulously clean and neat, and in a few moments the old man came to the door and looked in as if he wanted to know something.
“Now then, Dick, tea as soon as you like,” said Mr. Reeves,
n6
HARRY THE YER'YON.
in answer to the look; “this gentleman has had a long walk, and I a long ride ; so look alive ! ”
Dick stared at me very hard, evidently much astonished at hearing me referred to as a gentleman, but he merely wagged his head and hobbled off to prepare the tea. The table-cloth was rather crumpled and not very fresh, but the pannikins and tin plates were nearly as bright as silver, whilst the beautiful brown bread, fresh eggs, and hot chops served on them made a meal (it for a prince. I was a little surprised, even in this country of surprises, when Dick sat down with us, looking as stiff as a poker and as solemn as an owl. But as soon as we had finished—and we ate straight away, without dawdling over our food—he cleared the things off with great promptitude and disappeared for the night.
Left to ourselves, Reeves lit his pipe and gave me a short outline of his own history. I listened eagerly, for it was a comfort to hear the story of a difficult life, which, at all events, had won even a moderate degree of success. His parents had arrived in the colony some thirty years before, when it was first founded, bringing their young children with them, and a ridiculous quantity of luggage and furniture including a grand piano, sofas, mirrors, and wardrobes. In those days there was no house large enough to admit such things by its door, and all these useless but once valuable articles lay on the beach till the winter’s rain and the
BACLLELOR HALL.
”7
summer’s sun completely destroyed them, their wooden cases having been taken off, as the rough deal planks were far more serviceable than the costly furniture they were meant to protect. Some money had been brought, also; but this modest capital—the possible foundation of a fine fortune— had been frittered away in experiments. One thing was tried after another, but failure was the result of ignorance and incapacity, even when accompanied by good intentions and a sort of spasmodic industry.
Gradually the family became very poor, and at last the old people died, leaving two sons and a daughter to struggle on as best they could. It seemed a pitiful story, and yet, as I listened, I perceived how, though the money had gone from the home, all the precious part of the home life had remained—the family ties, the good manners, the gentlemanly feelings and instincts; and these had all survived in the person of the rather shabby elderly man sitting on the other side of the table.
Young ladies were very scarce in those days, and Miss Reeves, being both pretty and nice, soon found a husband in a . good position. He was not only a gentleman, but a kind fellow to boot, for he helped his brothers-in-law willingly with both money and advice. They in their turn were steady enough, and both worked and lived hard. Their life of self-denial and toil had been successful, and they were,
118 HARA Y TRE FERRON.
both of them, in fairly prosperous circumstances now. The elder son, George, was my host, and the owner of Bachelor Hall.
“And now, Treverton,” Mr. Reeves continued, “what shall we do with you? My idea is to keep you with me, where you can make yourself generally useful till my brother Edward comes in from the cattle-station. We will hear what he has to say about it, but I have a strong idea that he will be very glad to take you back there with him, for I know he wants some one to give him a hand up there. In the meantime I will pay you thirty shillings a month as a beginning. How will this arrangement suit you?”
It was not a very brilliant offer, but it was most kindly made, and, short as my colonial experience had been, I felt sure I ought to accept it at once, which I accordingly did, with very sincere thanks to Mr. Reeves for his helping hand.
That night I slept on a hard straw palliasse, as soundly and comfortably as though it had been a bed of down, for my mind, as well as my body, was at rest, and I heartily thanked God that at last I had found a home, and that my weary tramp had ended.
CHAPTER XII.
JEALOUSY.
"'J''HE morning after my arrival at Mr. Reeves’, I observed that old Dick did not sit down to breakfast with us, but
I only supposed he might be too busy to do so.
Mr. Reeves spoke very kindly to me, and mentioned that he would not expect me to do any hard work for a few days, but that I might help Dick to grind some flour in a hand-mill. Of course I said that I was willing and anxious to do anything he might desire.
“ I daresay you and Dick will be thrown together a good ■deal,” Mr. Reeves said, with a little anxiety and embarrassment in his tone, of which I better understood the meaning later. “ I shall often have to be away from home looking after things, and I shouldn’t wonder if he may show off some of his tempers to you, just at first. But, taking him altogether, he is really a capital servant; I can depend upon him, and he is clean and honest; so if he comes it too strong over you, just you shut him up, and he’ll soon shake down into his place.”
In spite of Mr. Reeves’ airy hint, I felt this was not a cheerful prospect, and probably meant, in plain English, “ Look out for squalls, my boy ! ”
119
120
NARRY TREVERTON.
However, there was no help for it, and as soon as Mr. Reeves had mounted his horse and ridden away, I rambled round the homestead and came upon my ancient friend busy among the pigs and poultry. I wished him good morning, but he pretended to be too much absorbed in his work to hear me, and took no notice of my greeting. I was determined to make him speak, so I shouted, as though I imagined he must be very deaf—
“ That’s a fine lot of fowls you’ve got there, Mr. Dick ! ”
My ruse succeeded, for the old fellow quite winced at my bellow close to his ear, and, turning snappishly on me, said,
“Now, look here, young chap, I don’t want any mistering! I’m just a servant on monthly wages, and I take it you’re about the same, for the master said as how you were to help me grind some wheat by’m-bye.”
This pleasant speech was evidently intended at once to put me in my proper place and to show me what that place was. in the old curmudgeon’s estimation, but I determined not to allow myself to be “ drawn ” so easily as all that, and answered cheerfully,
“Yes, I’m to help you grind some flour; and I’m quite ready to begin whenever you are.”
“ Come on, then,” growled Dick, “ come along, and we’ll soon see what you’re made of.”
What an old crab it was ! but there was no help for it, so I
JEALOUSY.
121
followed him in silence and with as easy an air as I could command, to the back veranda, where stood a hand flourmill, into the hopper of which Dick poured some wheat.
“Now, then, just lay hold of that ’ere ’andle and grind away.” I did as I was told, and in another minute Dick and I were grinding away as if our very lives depended on how fast we could make the cranks fly. My old adversary was certainly very strong, and worked with ferocious energy. I had to do my very best to keep pace with him, and round went the handles and the fly-wheel, whilst Dick and I bobbed up and down and tore away as though each wanted to see which was the better man. At last I really thought I must give in, when, without a word, Dick let go his handle, and stood up, with a sort of groan, to straighten himself. You may be sure I followed his example pretty quickly, but managed to suppress the groan.
“ Well, and how do you like that ? ” asked Dick, evidently savage that I had not been obliged to give in first.
“I like it very much indeed,” I remarked, gaily. “Shall we go on again ? ”
“Yes, yes, we’ll go on again d’rectly minnit, but I’d jest like to know first if you be anybody in pertikeler ? ” snarled Dick.
“ What on earth do you mean ? what are you driving at ?” I inquired, with wide-opened eyes.
122
HARR Y TRE PERRON:
“Well, I mean, are you a lord, or a dook, or a heart, or maybe, a prince in disguise, like ?”
“Certainly not!” I cried; “what makes you ask such a foolish question ? ”
“ Oh, but you must be a lord at the very least,” Dick said, positively.
“ And pray, why must I be a lord ? ”
“ I’ll tell you why, if you’ll jest answer me one or two questions.”
“All right,” I answered, anxious to get all this nonsense over. “ Go ahead.”
“Well, now,” resumed Dick, in his most aggressive voice, “ how many on us sat down to tea last night ? ”
“You, and I, and Mr. Reeves,” I replied.
“That’s right. Now, how many on us sat down this morning?”
“Well, this morning I noticed that you were not at the breakfast-table.”
“ No, I wasn’t at the breakfast-table this morning,” growled Dick; “ because, you see, it would have been too much for me. The 'honour’ would likely have made me ill, so the master says, says he, ‘ You can ha’ breakfast arter we’re finished, Dick,’ which was werry considerate o’ him, werry.”
“Well, my good man, I had nothing to do with the
JEALOUSY.
123
arrangement, /should not object to sit down to meals with you, if it was left to me to decide.”
“Now that’s what I call real condescending in a lord!” cried Dick, with feigned admiration, which changed into sudden ferocity as he grasped his handle and said, savagely, “ P’r’aps your lordship would be pleased to lay hold of that ’ere ’andle and grind some more wheat.”
The old fellow’s manner was certainly most irritating, and I determined not to stand too much of his nonsense. Meanwhile we set to work again, but the first spell had evidently taken it out of my aged mate, and the evolutions were nothing like so rapid as on the first occasion, for which I was not at all sorry. Once more we stopped, and again the old man referred to his grievance, saying, as though to himself, in an injured tone of voice, “It beats me how any man whose sister is married to the hangman can be so terrible pertikeler who he’ll sit down to meals with and who he won’t! ”
This remark seemed to be the proverbial last straw, and I could stand it no longer.
“ Whose sister is married to the hangman ? ” I shouted, in a rage; “do you mean mine? Just you take care what you’re saying or I’ll ram your libellous words down your shrivelled old throat! ” and I made a step towards the old curmudgeon as though to carry out my threat.
“Now don’t get savage, don’t,” said old Dick, retreating,
124
HARRY TREVERTON.
and evidently under the belief that I was going to strike him. “I wasn’t talking about you at all, so just let us get on with the grinding.”
“No!” I shouted; “no more of your mill for me till you explain whose sister you dare to talk of as having married the hangman! You’ve been sneering at me and annoying me all the morning, thinking, no doubt, you could vent your beastly temper on a stranger; but you’ll find you’re mistaken, my fine fellow. Now then, out with it! Whose sister is married to the hangman ? ”
Dick kept retreating before my flashing eyes and loud voice, and when he was stopped by the wall said, in quite a different and subdued tone, “Well, then, if you want to know so very pertikeler, it’s your master’s.”
“What!” I exclaimed; “do you mean to tell me that Mr. Reeves’s sister is married to the common hangman ? ”
“No, I didn’t say common hangman,” said Dick, still speaking soothingly and persuasively; “I said ‘hangman,’ and I meant ‘sheriff,’ because, you see, if at any time he could get no one to hang a man for him, they do tell me he’s bound to do the job himself.”
“ And so that’s the way you speak of your master and his relations, is it, Master Dick?” I asked, with indignation. “ I thought you were a different sort of chap, I
must say.”
JEALOUSY.
127
“Well,” whined Dick, looking—as I intended him to do —thoroughly ashamed of himself, “what does he mean to insult me for, by turning me away from the table because another servant sits down with him ? ”
“ I’ve told you before,” I said, very hotly, “ that I’ve nothing whatever to do with turning you away from the table, and sooner than remain here to be insulted, I shall leave the place at once; ” and off I stalked into the house, fully intending to pack up my swag and take the road once more.
Whilst I was busy folding up my clothes, old Dick came to the door, and in a very humble tone of voice said, “Now look here, Mr. Treverton, you stay here, and as soon as the master comes home I’ll give him a month’s notice.”
I stopped packing to reflect on this proposal, and told the old fellow to go away and I would think about it, but it was no easy matter to come to a resolution on. I liked Mr. Reeves, and would very much rather stay at Bachelor Hall for a time than be thrown on the world to beg for a livelihood again. On the other hand, if old Dick were to be allowed to go on sneering and snarling at me, life would be simply unendurable; and it certainly would never do to let him give notice to leave, for had not Mr. Reeves told me, only a few hours before, that old Dick was a good and trusty servant ? It was a difficult problem to
128
HARRY TREVERTON.
solve, and at last I determined to try and effect a compromise, so I went off into the kitchen, where my crusty friend was pretending to be very busy, and said, “Now look here, Dick, I don’t want you to leave this place, for I know that Mr. Reeves thinks very highly of you; nor do I want to miss the chance of going up country to the cattle-station, which would suit me down to the ground, so I think we’d better both remain where we are, but you must promise not to insult me any more, for though I may be poor and friendless, I still claim to be a gentleman.”
“All right, then,” said Dick, who had ceased his work to listen to what I had to say; “let it be so, but blow me if I can make out why I should be good enough to work with a man, and yet not good enough to sit down to table along of him. But no matter, come on, and we’ll finish grinding that hopper of wheat; ” and at it we went again, bobbing up and down at a steadier pace than ever.
Mr. Reeves did not return until evening, when he came back in very good humour, having found all the missing sheep. After tea we resumed our conversation about the hardships of colonial life, and I naturally asked if he had come across many young men in my own position, and what they did for a livelihood.
“Yes,” he replied, “and some have done very well; they have, of course, been the steady, hardworking ones. They
JEALOUSY.
129
have soon made friends, and everyone has lent them a helping hand towards getting work. Others, again, have lived from hand to mouth, riding about from station to station, getting in stray horses, or training them for the races. Perhaps, now and then, they may come in for a stroke of cattle-hunting or droving. The worst of it, as far as the men themselves are concerned, is, that wherever they go a welcome awaits them, for they are generally jolly, devil-may-care sort of chaps, quite as ready to do a hard night’s drinking as a hard day’s work. The moment they have earned a few pounds, off they go to the nearest township, and it does not take long to make an end of their bit of money; and then the whole thing begins again, but it is a very unsatisfactory way of going on. I remember once dropping in on a friend of mine who had just got through a couple of thousand pounds in gambling and racing. It was about all he had, and there he was, as fine a young fellow as you ever saw—good education, and all that—living in a miserable bush shanty. He was delighted to see me, though he hadn’t a shilling in the world, and would not hear of my going a step farther that night. About half an hour after I had arrived he made an excuse for leaving me for a bit, but begged me to sit down and make myself comfortable with a pipe. It was getting cold and dark outside, so I went in and looked about me. Poor as the place seemed, there were still traces of better
9
HARRY TREVERTON.
130
days about—a good saddle in one corner, some handsome pipes in a little stand, and so forth. My eye was caught by a large album on a trestle-table at one side of the wretched hovel, and I amused myself by looking at it by the light of a couple of home-made tallow candles. There were portraits of lovely women, stalwart men whom even the photographer’s art of those days could not prevent from looking like well-bred gentlemen, officers of both services, high in rank, and with their breasts covered with medals and decorations, evidently my absent host’s former friends and acquaintances. As I closed the book and looked at the dwelling which was now all he could call his own, I thought what a contrast the present must make to the past. By-and-bye, he came back, merry as a sand-boy, with materials for supper in his hands, and the inevitable bottle of grog sticking out of his pocket. He bustled about and soon had eggs and bacon in the frying-pan, and said, cheerily, ‘Well, Reeves, I’m right glad you came, for I don’t believe I’d have got any supper, else! You see, I’m due at Smith’s to-morrow morning, to help old Sinbad get in his cattle, and somehow it didn’t seem worth while bothering about supper for one’s self. So you’ve been having a look at my family Bible, old chap, have you ? ’
“ I said something about never having heard an album called a Bible before, when the poor fellow straightened himself up, and quite a different look came over his face as he replied,
^EALOUSy.
131
‘ Well, Reeves, if you only knew how often a look at the dear old Pater and Mater, and all the rest of them in that book, had kept me either from cutting my throat or going headlong to the devil, you wouldn’t wonder at my calling it a Bible. The faces in that book have done a good deal for me, I can tell you.’ ”
“What became of him?” I asked with breathless interest.
“Oh,he just went on leading that sort of Bohemian life for two or three years more, and then his health gave way suddenly and he had to go to hospital. The doctor wrote, without his knowledge, to his friends at home, telling them he ought never to do a hard day’s work again, and so they got him back. What a wreck they must have thought him, and what an idea he must have given them of a colonial career, eh ? But the poor chap got back among his own people for a year or two, and at all events he didn’t die like a sheep in the bush, as he would have done if he hadn’t got away from it at all.”
Although the story was by no means a parallel one to my own, still I felt very much saddened. Mr. Reeves soon got up however, and, shaking the ashes out of his pipe, nodded a friendly good-night to me, leaving me to go off to my bed.
9—2
CHAPTER XIII.
lost!
J HAD been living at Bachelor Hall for about a month, during which period old Dick and I had ground out many a hopper of wheat without any further displays of temper from him. I had worked hard, helping to clear ground and cart in firewood from the bush; my hands had become hard, my face sun-burned, and my clothes had taken on the peculiar dirty-white tint peculiar to garments which are subjected to a scrubbing-brush and cold water. Indeed, I quite imagined myself to be the typical healthy young bushman, as I lounged out of the cottage one pleasant Sunday morning, leaving Mr. Reeves busy inside writing letters, whilst old Dick pottered about as usual among his pigs and poultry.
As I have already mentioned, I had on several occasions accompanied old Dick to the bush, and helped him to cart in loads of firewood for the homestead, so I fancied I knew my way about quite well, and on this particular morning I determined to go for a ramble and do a little exploring on my own account in the direction of the firewood clearing. I whistled Rover, our splendid kangaroo dog, to heel, and off we started.
132
LOST.
i33
The country about Bachelor Hall was of the usual hilly character—undulating ground covered with tall trees and rather open scrub. I had not the smallest intention of going
WATCHING THE DOG’S EVERY MOVE.
more than a very safe distance from home, when suddenly old Rover started off in full cry after a large kangaroo, and I ran after them as hard as I could, to keep in sight of the
134
HARRY TREVERTON.
chase. Fortune favoured me, for just as the dog was about to disappear over the brow of a hill, the kangaroo turned and came bounding along towards me, with old Rover in close pursuit, about ten yards behind him. As the boomer approached I stooped to pick up a stick, when he must have observed me, for again he changed his course, and in a few bounds he and the dog were out of sight.
In less than a minute I heard old Rover barking savagely a good way off, so away I went again after them, and very soon saw the boomer at bay, with his back against a tree, as upright as a man, watching the dog’s every move, and ready, on the slightest opportunity, to give him the benefit of his sharp claws and feet. But old Rover was not to be taken advantage of; like a prudent dog, he simply “worried round,” watching for a chance to attack in the rear. With a view to assist my friend in his strategic movements, I commenced to fling sticks at the enemy, of which he did not take much notice until one of them hit him a good thump on the nose, which liberty he promptly resented, and, to my horror, made a spring at me. Fortunately old Rover flew at him at the same moment, hoisted him over by the tail, and then, seizing him by the throat, very soon settled him.
Yes, there lay the huge boomer dead at my feet; and I felt not a little proud of my performance as an Australian
LOST.
i35
hunter on that bright, cheery morning. I determined to carry some of my quarry home as evidence of my prowess, so, taking out my knife, I set to work to skin the beast, old Rover looking lazily on, no doubt under the impression that he had already done his full share of the work, and might now take things easy.
After a great deal of trouble, I managed to skin the big beast; I then cut, or rather hacked the body in two, and with great difficulty hoisted it on my back, taking a leg in each hand, which stuck out on each side of my head like huge horns, whilst the long thick tail fell back at an angle of forty-five degrees to the rear. It was a heavy burthen, but the prospect of being able to show it at the homestead encouraged me to use my utmost exertions, so on I went, the proud possessor of at least fifty pounds’ weight of kangaroo flesh.
After walking for about a mile, it occurred to me that I ought to see the clearing, instead of which, so far as the appearance of the bush was concerned, I seemed to be in exactly the same place from whence I had started. This was by no means a satisfactory state of affairs, for I was becoming very tired of carrying my game, and threw it down to have a spell. Having rested for a short time I made a fresh start, and on I went again until I felt quite tired out, and still no sign of the clearing. Down went
136
HARRY TREVERTON.
the meat, and once more I seated myself on a fallen tree, wondering how it was that I had not reached home.
Surely I could not have lost myself! It was an unpleasant idea, and I put it from me as quickly as possible. One thing was quite certain, however, that I could not carry the kangaroo any farther, and I resolved to get home as quickly as possible without it, for I felt an imperative need of changing my blood-stained, stiffened clothes, and, above all things, of getting a drink of water I became suddenly conscious that I was extremely tired, and absolutely parched with thirst, besides which the flies attracted by the kangaroo’s blood on my hands and face, worried me almost beyond endurance.
Rover had followed closely on my heels, and was lying panting at my feet, when a bright idea occurred to me. Jumping up, I said, “Go home, Rover; come along, old man ! go home! ” But Rover did not feel at all inclined to take the hint. Again and again I tried him, but it was of no use; he simply gazed at me and wagged his tail.
“What a stupid brute you are!” I cried, “if you won’t go for being told, I’ll just see if I can’t drive you!” and I lifted the stick in a threatening manner, hoping to see him rush off in a bee line for the cottage. But no, Rover was not accustomed to being beaten, and did not think I
L0S7.
i37
was going to begin now, so he just slunk behind a bush, and lolled his tongue out at me farther than ever.
It was very aggravating; only an hour ago I had looked at the dog with pride and pleasure ; now, I felt deeply disgusted and annoyed at his stupidity. However, it was quite evident that I must depend entirely on my own efforts to regain the cottage, and I looked anxiously about, trying to make up my mind in which direction I ought to steer. It was by nc means an easy conclusion to arrive at, for- the lorest was so absolutely uniform and monotonous that one place seemed exactly like another.
I looked up at the sun, and endeavoured to recollect in what direction it rose, having reference to the position of the cottage; but it was well up in the heavens, and I could make nothing of it—in fact, it appeared to be in the wrong place. The more I tried to fix my position the greater became my perplexity. Yet I felt certain I could not be any very great distance from home, even presuming that I had been carrying the kangaroo in the wrong direction, and determined to try if I could not make myself heard by shouting. I soon found out, however, that to shout lustily with a throat absolutely parched and dry was no easy matter. I had not yet learned how to give forcefully the Australian “ coo-e! ” and two or three rough, croaking sounds were the only result of my best efforts.
IRARRY TREVERTON.
*38
Everything appeared to be in league against me—the position of the sun, the stupidity of the dog, the sameness of the forest, and the torment of the flies, which worried me most dreadfully. My heart failed me as I reflected on the position I was in. If I sat still I might be found in a day or two, perhaps sooner, and this is what I ought to have done, but, like many others who have gone through the horrors of being “ lost in the bush,” I found it impossible to remain inactive. Besides, it seemed so cowardly to sit down without making some effort to save myself, so off I started again, with Rover following at a respectful distance.
The plan of action I had determined on was to make the dead kangaroo my starting-point, and walk about two miles in different directions from that spot, and I hoped in this way to come within sight of the clearing. My first attempt, however, proved a distinct failure, for not only did I fail to find the track to the cottage, or any track at all, but in retracing my steps I found I had also lost my starting-point, and felt more confused than ever.
By this time the sun had become terribly hot, my thirst was also increasing to a painful degree, and the hope of being able to obtain a drink urged me to another foolish attempt. I had heard that in travelling through the bush it was a good thing to keep one’s shadow in a certain
.LOST.
Mi
position, but I ought also to have recollected that, unless I knew exactly in what direction to steer, the chances would be ten to one that I should go wrong. However, I determined to try the experiment, arguing with myself that if I kept on a straight course I must surely reach somewhere. So I made another start, this time alone, for the dog had disappeared.
What torture I experienced as I rambled painfully onwards, not knowing whither I was going 1 The flies worried me nearly to distraction, and at last I tore off my blood-stained garments and threw them away. Fortunately, I had on some underclothing, or the sun would have scorched me to death. As it was, I felt that I could not stand very much more.
After walking for several hours, I found myself in a barren-looking iron-stone range—no doubt farther from home than ever, with death staring me fully in the face.
It would have been a great relief could I have had a good cry, like a baby, but even this comfort was denied me, for the fountain of my tears appeared to be literally dried up, and I could only make a moaning, half-idiotic noise as, in a state of semi-delirium, I called upon God to release me from my sufferings. With swollen tongue, parched and blistered lips, and aching limbs, I threw myself on the ground beneath a shrub. I had done my
142
HARRY TREVERTON.
best and failed, and now nothing remained for me but to die—the sooner the better.
To any English reader it may seem well nigh impossible that a strong, active lad, in perfect health and training, could be reduced to such terrible straits in a few hours. It must be borne in mind, however, that I had been walking all day, without food or drink, beneath the almost tropical sun of an Australian summer, and that I was absolutely exhausted with fatigue and excitement, to say nothing of a raging thirst, and the torments of thousands of flies. There was also the ever-present terror of meeting one of the most awful deaths—a death from slow starvation—which it is possible for a human being to suffer, and my mind was, I confess, quite unhinged and paralyzed by the dread of such a fate. Let anyone who thinks my sufferings may have been imaginary, ask one of his Australian friends how long an English boy of my age would have been likely to exist under the conditions I have attempted to recall and describe.
For hours I lay moaning in my misery, and at last I either slept or became unconscious. I remember that once during the night I was disturbed by the howls of a pack of dingoes, or native dogs, and that as they came very near me I feebly waved my arms, crying, “Not yet! not yet!” and again I slept, or fainted, I know not which.
When the day broke, and I roused myself up, I found I
LOST.
US
was considerably revived. A heavy dew had fallen and had moistened my parched lips and fevered body. Again the love of life sprang up in my breast, and again I determined to make an effort to save that life. As I rose to my feet I staggered like a drunken man, and could with difficulty ramble about in an aimless manner, for the renewed strength of mind and body which darkness and rest brought me did not last long under the old conditions of hunger and anxiety. Once more I became thoroughly exhausted, and threw myself again under a tree, moaning hoarsely through my parched lips, “ Lost, lost, lost! Come death! come quickly ! ” and then I became-as unconscious as though the King of Terrors had himself mercifully answered my invocation.
CHAPTER XIV.
FOUND.
WAS it a beautiful dream, or had I passed from this world of trouble into a land of perfect rest and happiness ?
A sound as of many waters filled my ears, misty forms floated before my eyes, kind hands touched me gently, bathing my fevered body with deliciously cool water, and some strong and reviving liquid touched and moistened my lips, though as yet I 'could not swallow it. Now and again the words, “ Poor fellow! poor fellow! ” fell pleasantly on my ears, as though borne thither through the din and mist of a mighty torrent, and the first words I heard near and distinctly were in Mr. Reeves’ voice as he said, “ Here, let me raise his head, and try to get some of that down his throat.” “ That ” turned out to be very weak brandy and water, though at the moment it tasted as though liquid fire were touching my blistered lips and swollen tongue.
By degrees the mist cleared away, the forms began to assume distinct shapes, and I heard someone asking, “ Don’t
144
FOUND.
145
you know me, Harry?” The question was repeated many times before my consciousness had sufficiently returned to suggest to me that I ought to answer. At last—and that was after a tremendous effort, which nearly choked me, had sent a spoonful of brandy and water down my throat—I opened my eyes.
Thank God! Oh! thank God, I was no longer alone in that dreadful bush ! My head was resting on a man’s knee; kind, earnest eyes were gazing anxiously down upon my face, and, oh joy inexpressible! I recognised my kind friend Reeves. With the instinct of a child, I put my hand up as a baby does, to feel his face, and so make sure of the blessed reality. Something in the helpless gesture touched him to tears, and as he stooped his head towards mine, I asked in a hoarse whisper, “Have I been found?”
“Yes, yes, my boy; thank God, you have been found, and you’ll soon be all right again. Try and take a drop more of this.”
Yes, Heaven be praised! it was old Reeves lifting me up as tenderly as a mother would have done, and holding a pannikin to my lips. I took a sip to please him, but the fiery liquid, as it seemed to me, was too agonising to try to swallow.
“ More water ! ” I gasped.
“Yes, presently. Now lie down again,” he said soothingly,
10
146
.HARRY TRE VER TON.
as he gently placed my head on a rolled-up blanket, and, as I willingly closed my eyes, I again thanked God most fervently for having sent my friend to bring me back to life, when all hope had fled, and my last conscious prayer to Him had been for a speedy death.
I think I must have dozed off to sleep for a while, for when I opened my eyes again Mr. Reeves was still sitting near me, brushing the flies off my face with a small bough. A fire crackled cheerfully near, and he lifted me up, and held a pannikin of warm tea, with milk in it, to my lips. This time I drank long and eagerly, and when the bushcup was empty, felt sufficiently revived to try and raise myself up on my elbow, and look about me. My head ached so badly, and I felt so frightfully weak, that I was glad to lie down again directly; but my glance had shown me, to my great surprise, not only Reeves, whom I expected to see, but a great many people, mostly strangers, moving about. Some were already seated on horseback, whilst others were busy saddling up and making ready for a start.
“What are all those people doing here?” I asked Mr. Reeves, who still watched and helped me, as though I had been his son.
“Those men,” he whispered back (for some, seeing my
eyes open, were coming towards us), “have been scouring
I^OUNjD.
M7
the bush since daylight this morning looking for you, and now they are going home.”
As he spoke, two or three of them led their horses up to where I was sitting, shook hands kindly with me, and, adding many expressions—rough but hearty—of satisfaction at having found me in time, and assurances that I would be all right in a day or two, mounted their horses, and rode away to their homes. I had thanked them as well as my weak voice and still dazed condition would allow, and the good fellows looked as compassionately at me as if I had been their dearest friend, instead of a total stranger.
The bush-track soon carried the last man to depart out of sight, and then Mr. Reeves and I were left alone, with only the native tracker, a decent-looking man, dressed in odds and ends of European costume, who helped my friend to make his preparations to camp for the night.
It was not long before the sun went down; and then my poor friend, who had not slept for forty-eight hours, and was pretty well worn out with anxiety and fatigue, was glad to turn in. This was a very primitive and simple proceeding, for it consisted in just lying down on the ground, with his saddle for a pillow, and pulling his blanket over him. He had the consideration to come close to me, guessing that, in the shattered state of my nerves, human contact and companionship was just the one thing I most needed. Before
148 JTARRY TREVERTON.
he fell asleep, he said, half laughing, but kindly, as a nurse would speak to a child, “ Now, if you get to dreaming, Harry, just put out your hand and touch me, and you’ll know I’m here, and then you’ll feel all right.” He was asleep two minutes later, and I too dozed off, wondering by what subtle intuition he could know so exactly what was passing through my mind—if, indeed, so feeble and chaotic a jumble of ideas could be called a mind at all.
At daybreak next morning I awoke, feeling very much better, though still stiff, and curiously weak and helpless. The native got in the horses, whose bells had tinkled pleasantly all night in my ears, as they moved about through the bush feeding; and Mr. Reeves soon lighted a fire and made a pannikin of good strong tea. There were also the materials for a slight breakfast, though I could not cat much, my tongue and lips and throat being still too swollen and painful to swallow. After we had all finished, a start was made for home, the native walking by my side, as he had given up his horse to me. I certainly could not have walked, and it was with great difficulty I kept on the saddle, even at the foot-pace at which we were going. I said something about being sorry that I should have to take the man’s horse from him, when Reeves remarked that it did not matter, for that we were only six or seven miles from home.
FOUND.
149
“ Only seven miles ! ” I exclaimed, in surprise. “ How is that ? for I feel perfectly convinced I must have walked at least forty.”
“ So you did, my boy,” replied Reeves, “ but you must
ONLY SEVEN MILES FROM HOME.
consider what a roundabout way you took to accomplish the distance. However, we will not talk about that now,” he added hastily, seeing the distress in my face as I began at once to grope among my ideas for a clue to what had
happened, “let us get home first, and then, when you are
150 HARRY THE VERTON.
in better trim, if you want to hear the story, I promise to give you a full account of how we searched for you.”
It took us actually three hours, going literally at a snail’s pace, for I could not bear the slightest motion, before we reached the cottage. Old Dick was there, waiting for us, all his crustiness laid aside, and he welcomed me and helped me from the saddle as gently as though I had been a precious object labelled “ Glass with care.” When I was safely on my feet, but wondering how the steps up to the veranda were to be surmounted, he shook hands with me most cordially, and affected to treat my unfortunate excursion to the bush as a long and perilous journey, from which I had returned safely.
“My word, Muster Treverton,” said the old fellow, as he put his hand beneath my elbow to help me up the steps, “ but you’ve had a rare doing up! I was glad, I can tell you, when some o’ the search party called in last night on their way home, and mentioned as you was found.”
“Yes, thank you, Dick,” I replied, trying to smile as I pressed the old chap’s hand, “ I’m all right now, I hope: but I can tell you I didn’t feel much like a lord, or a duke, or an earl when I was lying under a tree dying of thirst.”
The old fellow grinned and wagged his head, as much as to say he could easily believe that, and, trotting off,
FOUND.
151
presently returned with a large bowl of tepid i^dk anti water, which I drained to the very last drop.
Several days passed before, in spite of perfect rest and nourishing food, I felt at all myself again. Not only did I suffer considerable pain in my feet and limbs, which ached as though I had been beaten and bruised all over, but the sun had so scorched and blistered my body that I found it impossible to lie in any one position for more than a few minutes without the part I was lying on feeling as if it were slowly grilling over a clear fire !
“Yes, you’ve had a pretty good baking, Muster Treverton,” old Dick would remark, “ and now I must give yer a good basting! ” and he would dab a lot of oil on my neck, chest, and shoulders till I felt as shiny and as slimy as a Red Indian going to a war-dance.
In the course of a fortnight I was so far recovered that I was able to go to light work again, when Mr. Reeves, who had not said much on the subject, asked me one evening when we were sitting in the veranda after tea, to give him an account of how I had managed to lose myself, and of what I had gone through up to the time of his finding me.
After listening attentively to my story, he said, “Well, my poor boy, I must admit you’ve had a terrible time of it, and the curious part of the whole affair is that you were
’52
HARRY TRE VER TON.
doing your very best all the while to baffle us in our search for you. It’s very odd, but it’s always the case—it’s the lost man himself who turns and doubles as cleverly as if he was trying to hide instead of to be found! I remember hearing of one man, a good deal older, and with more bush experience than you, who went raving mad under exactly similar conditions. He threw off every stitch of his clothes and dodged round the trees for hours after they had caught sight of him, for all the world as though they were bent on taking his life instead of saving it. However, they managed to get hold of him at last, put some clothes on him by main force, strapped him with girths into an American waggon they had chanced to bring to the nearest clearing, and took him, after a deal of trouble, to the hospital, where he was laid up for months. The doctor told me he never had such a job in his life as bringing that man round ; but he did get all right at last, senses and all, but it took a long while first. And now, Harry, do you really want to hear about our search for jwe, or have you had enough of it ? ”
“ I should like you to tell me about it,” I replied, “ and then we will close the subject for ever.”
“Very well,” he said, laying down his pipe and settling himself comfortably for a story. “ I dare say you remember that on the Sunday morning when you started off for the
.FOUND.
153
bush I was very busy writing letters. I did not therefore miss you till dinner-time, when Dick came into the room to prepare the table, and remarked that he could not tell where you had got to, as he had not seen you since about nine o’clock, when you and Rover had left the house together and gone into the bush. This statement made me rather anxious, as you are such a new chum, and my uneasiness increased when the dog returned in the course of the afternoon without you. I at once examined his mouth, and soon perceived by the hair inside his jaws that he had certainly killed a kangaroo. I then consulted Dick as to whether he thought you had any idea of the lay of the country. He said not, and increased my alarm by adding that, in his opinion, you would be about as good at finding your way home through the bush as a three-year-old child. It was then evident that no time should be lost, so I saddled up old Rapid and started off, hoping to meet you or find you rambling about in search of the homestead, but you had plainly got too long a start of me. I scoured the forest backwards and forwards in every direction till dark, but without coming upon the faintest sign of your track. I shouted every now and then, till I became as hoarse as a raven. But it was all of no use, as you know.”
“ What an idiot I was,” I could not help saying, “ not
i54
HARR\ TREVERTON.
to have sat still! Had I only done that, I am certain you would have found me easily that very evening.”
“Yes,” replied Reeves, “just so ; but people who get lost in the bush never do sit still. They ramble about exactly as you did, and in nine cases out of ten lose their lives by travelling as fast as they can exactly in the opposite direction to the place they want to reach. Well, I got home long after dark (and I only wonder I didn’t get < bushed ’ too), in a terrible state of anxiety, for, as you know too well, the day had been frightfully hot, and I felt perfectly certain that unless we succeeded in finding you within forty-eight hours, we should most likely be too late after that to do you any good. I drank a pannikin of tea and gave old Rapid a feed of corn, and then I started off down the road to obtain the assistance of some neighbours. Dick also posted off towards Fielder’s on the same errand, and by midnight this house was full of men and the stockyard of horses. Dick gave us some breakfast by lamplight, and the horses got a good feed, for with the first ray of dawn we were in the saddle. The worst of it was that I had only been able to get hold of one native, but he was a capital fellow, and we soon got on your track, and followed it up steadily. After a bit Dan (the black fellow) shouted, ‘Hulloa! white fellow run-um ; dog run-um ; kangaroo run-um ! ’ and we rattled along at a good pace
SOUND.
155
for the running had made the footprints very distinct, and we soon got to the place where the kangaroo had been killed and skinned.
“ ‘ This way skin-um,’ cried Dan ; ‘ this way pick-um up and walk. Hulloa! wrong way walk-um ! ’
“Yes, the tracks evidently started off exactly in the wrong direction.
“‘This way chuck-um down,’ proclaimed Dan, who was quite our oracle; ‘ kangaroo too much heavy fellow,’ and he showed us where the kangaroo had been thrown to the ground, and where you had sat down near it. ‘ More pick-um up, more walk-um,’ went on Dan, muttering to himself, and running along like a dog, with his whole body bent towards the ground. After a short distance he stopped abruptly, straightened himself up, and looking at us gravely, for the whole story grew plainer and more alarming every moment, said, ‘This way chuck-um down and leave-um.’
“ There lay the hind quarters of the boomer, which you had been taking so much trouble to carry a couple of miles in the wrong direction; but it was very difficult to pick up your track after that, because, without the weight of the kangaroo on your back, your footprints became much lighter. However, the native once more bent his eyes on the ground, and we followed him slowly for a couple of miles. The ground then became so rough and hard that
HARRY TREVERTON.
156
Dan could make very little headway, and he began to get tired and lose his temper.
“ ‘ My word! ’ he cried, flinging the short stick, without which no native feels himself secure against snakes, down on the ground, ‘ my word! that white fellow too much fool. This way walk up, that way walk up! What for no good ? What for lose-um ? ’
“ So far the party had stuck together, thinking it possible that we might find you within a few miles of the homestead ; but now it was very evident that you had gone clean away from it, and nobody could tell how far. We were all asking ourselves the same question—whether we could possibly find you in time to save your life, for all of us were old bushmen, and knew well that two days of such broiling heat without water would be a good deal worse for you than a week’s wet weather without food. We held a short consultation, and came to the conclusion that it would be quite impossible to track quick enough over the rough, hard ground ; so we resolved to spread the party out over as much ground as possible, and so scour the bush, in the hopes that some one of us might pick you up.
“ In this fashion we travelled for a distance of fifteen miles, when one of the party gave a shout and went off at a gallop, but it only turned out to be your shirt. This turned out, however, to be a fortunate find, for it gave Dan a fresh start
.FOUND.
157
on your tracks, which he stuck to manfully, or you would not be sitting there at this moment, my boy ! Your course, after that, changed again, and you seemed to be making a semicircle towards home. You may imagine how excited we all became at this point of the proceedings, especially as Dan announced ‘ Him walking about all same drunk.’ This was good news in one way, because it showed that your strength was giving way, and that we might soon find you, perhaps lying down, unable to go any farther.
“ It must have been—let me see—about half an hour after that, when I heard another shout, and galloping up with the rest, had the most terrible moment of suspense I ever went through in my life. Sure enough, there you were ; and, if any living man looked like a dead body, it was you, Harry, my boy. It doesn’t do to talk of, even now ; and, I can tell you, if we’d been a couple of hours later we’d have been too late, and it was an open question for the first ten minutes whether we were not too late as it was. However, we stuck to you, and went on dashing the water each man had brought with him on your chest, and trying to get a drop down your throat. It was a blessed moment when you opened your eyes at last, though there wasn’t much speculation in them, old chap,” Mr. Reeves said, half-laughing, to conceal his emotion; and, getting up, he added, hastily, “Now, my dear boy, you know all about it, and let’s shake hands, and for mercy’s sake
158	HARRY TREVERTON.
never talk about it again. It’s high time you were in bed, so good-night.”
“ May God reward you, my dear Reeves ! ” I faltered, in broken accents, as I pressed my friend’s hand, and hurried away with a heart full of gratitude to the man who had, under Providence, been the means of bringing me back to life after I had indeed gone down into the Valley of the Shadow of Death.
CHAPTER XV.
CATTLE-DROVERS.
J MUST now pass over three months, during which period the monotony of our lives was pleasantly broken by the heavy winter rains which set in, and which had transformed the bush, quite suddenly, as it seemed to me, into a garden full of lovely wild flowers, blooming creepers, and shrubs covered with blossoms, whilst the hills and flats became carpeted, in the course of forty-eight hours or so, with grass and acres of “ everlastings ” of various and brilliant hues.
Dry water-courses changed, as though by magic, into brawling brooks, and the river-beds, until recently merely so many stretches of burning white sand and shingle, were now full of water, rushing noisily along, and filling up the deep pools and water-holes hitherto nearly dried up by the great summer heat. The atmosphere felt deliciously cool and clear, and I often found myself whistling or singing as I dug in the garden, grubbed up stumps from new ground, or took a turn at the old handmill with Dick, with whom, by-the-way, I was now on excellent terms.
It was still early on one of those lonely winter afternoons, 159
i6o
HA Ji RY TH EVE Ji TOM
when old Dick rushed up to Mr. Reeves, shouting with great glee,
“ Here they coom, muster, I do believe ! If that ain’t the crack of Muster Ned’s stock-whip I’m a Dutchman!”
We listened for a moment, and, sure enough, the pistollike snapping and cracking of distant stock-whips could plainly be heard. The sounds drew nearer every moment, and presently shouts of “Yah-hip, yah-hip ! ” alternated with the sharp reports of the stock-whips and the loud hoarse barking of dogs. A few moments later a mob of cattle could be discerned in the midst of the dust they had contrived to kick up in spite of the dampness of the ground. A white man and two natives—all on horseback— were wielding their stock-whips with great sound and fury in the rear, and the instant Reeves caught sight of these he ran to the large stockyard close by and let down its slip rails himself. The barking and cracking, and shuffling sound of hoofs came nearer and nearer, and in a very short time the great mob, or herd of cattle, had swept past us and passed into the stockyard, filling it with pushing and poking animals, so bewildered and weary that they were evidently glad of even the rough hospitality of a stockyard.
Yes, it was plainly Ned Reeves I now saw, who had dismounted and was shaking hands heartily with his brother, so I ran up to help Dick to show the natives where and
CATTLE-DROVERS. 161
how to stable and feed all the horses. In the meantime the two brothers had sauntered towards the cottage, laughing and talking both at the same time, with all the excitement so common to people who live in the bush, and have but little to vary the monotonous round of their every-day lives.
That evening, when I came in to tea, I was introduced to Mr. Reeves’ brother Ned, of whom I had so often heard him speak, and a very fine specimen of a young Australian bushman he was ! Six feet high in his stockings, and a pair of broad shoulders which would have made a life guardsman hold himself up to try and match their upright, easy carriage; merry, blue eyes, frank and yet shrewd, and a large black beard, which half hid a good-humoured handsome face. He had much higher spirits than his elder and quieter brother, but both talked and laughed gaily as we all ate, with open-air appetites, our simple supper of mutton, home-made bread, and tea. I looked at Ned Reeves with interest, and my first pleasant impressions were only deepened as I knew more of the man with whom I was destined to spend many happy days. The first words he said as he grasped my hand showed me that his brother had already mentioned my hopes and projects to him.
“ So you intend coming up to the cattle - station,
11
162
HARRY TRE VER TOH.
Treverton? I shall be very glad to see you there:” this with the most cordial smile and cheery tone, as if he were inviting a pleasant acquaintance to visit him, instead of offering shelter and food to a youth who was likely to be more trouble than profit to him for some time to come.
“Yes, indeed; I should like to go back with you above all things,” I answered, “if you think you could make me of any use.”
“That’s all right, then,” said Mr. Ned, heartily; “we shall start again in the morning, and I shall be glad if you could come on with me then. My brother says he has given you fair warning that you will have to rough it, so I hope you won’t mind sleeping without sheets and eating your tucker without a table-cloth, eh, my boy ? Billy” (I didn’t know what that meant quite, but guessed it might be the bush-word for goat-mutton, or else tea made in a “ billy ”) “ and damper one day, and, for a change, damper and billy the next. Tea without sugar, or sugar without tea; it just depends on which runs out first, you know. As for milk! we want it all for the calves, and never touch it ourselves. Do you think you could put up with that sort of thing? It’s no joke, I can tell you ! ”
“ Oh, yes,” I replied, with all the confidence of ignorance, “I can manage all that right enough, but don’t you find
billygoat rather rank eating ? ”
CA TTLE-DR 0 VERS.
163
Ned Reeves stared at me as though he thought I was indeed a queer youth. At last he gasped “ Billygoat! my good fellow, why what on earth do you mean ? ”
“You told me yourself, a minute ago, that we should have to live on billy and damper in the bush,” I answered rather nettled at his manner.
“Oh, you are a treat!” cried Ned, as he burst out laughing at what seemed to be a very poor joke, and went on laughing till he roared again. At last he turned to his brother, jwith “ I say, George, you have evidently neglected this young gentleman’s education most shamefully! Billy,” he explained turning towards me, “means kangaroo, not goat; ” and the gigantic bushman laughed loudly at my mistake. Indeed it was many a day before I heard the last of it, so far does a small joke go in the bush.
“Now we’ve settled about the grub,” Mr. Ned continued, as soon as he could cease chuckling over the billy blunder, “ I must tell you what you have to expect in the way of society. There are lots of natives about the place, but I am the only white man within reach. There’s the cattleboy, Johnnie, who is outside now, and my black protege, Billy, who is also with me now. I should advise you Treverton, to make a friend of that same young scamp, for although he is a capital lad, and almost invaluable to me
11—2
164
NARRY TREVERTON.
in my work, he is an awful tease when he takes a dislike to any one. Of course if he tries any of his nonsense in the way of practical jokes upon you, I shall just have to give him a taste of the stirrup leather, but I dare say you will jog on all right together.”
“The fact is this, Ned,” said his elder brother, who had been listening with an amused smile on his face, “you’ve done your best to spoil Master Dilly, and I should not be at all surprised to hear that he sits down to meals with you now.”
“No, no ! not quite,” cried Ned, exploding again; “I think I know where to draw the line, and what’s more, Dilly knows it too, and never ventures to take any liberties with me, whatever he may do with other people.”
After a short while I left the brothers to talk over their affairs, and went outside in search of the natives, as I felt rather anxious to make Mr. Dilly’s acquaintance. It was getting both cold and dark out of doors, and no one was to be seen, so I opened the kitchen door, and there I found the two lads crouching as close as they could get to the kitchen fire.
“ Hulloa, Dilly, how are you getting on ? ” I asked, wanting to find out which was Dilly.
The younger of the two natives, a nice, intelligent-looking lad of about my own age, with a splendid head of curly black
CA TTLEDRO VERS.
165
hair—for the Australian native’s hair more resembles that of the Spaniard than the wool of a negro—and a set of teeth simply perfect in their even and pearly whiteness, grinned in acknowledgment of my greeting, and promptly replied, in a very pleasant voice,
“ Me all right,—what name—you ? Me nothing know-um you ! ”
“ My name is Harry, and I am going with you and your master to the cattle-station to-morrow,” I answered.
“ All right,” said Dilly, again, these words, which he shortened into one, being his great formula; “ this my brother Peter” (a friend is always called a brother by the natives, as it is indeed among other black peoples), pointing to the other boy, who had not spoken, but who looked cold and tired, “ Peter walk station, drive-um cattle, by-um-bye come back ; you and me stop-um there.”
“Yes, and you and I must be good friends, Dilly,’ I said, holding out my hand to him, for I was anxious to take Mr. Ned’s hint, and get on good terms with this young savage, who might turn out either a useful friend or a disagreeable acquaintance indeed, according to what sort of a beginning we made now.
Dilly looked at me rather shyly as he just touched my fingers, and then laughed merrily, as though we had gone through a very amusing ceremony. However, from that
i66
HARRY TREVERTON.
moment he called me Harry, and we became excellent friends.
On the following morning we were all up by lamplight, and had breakfasted, saddled up, and were ready to start for “ Running River ” cattle-station with the first glimmer of daylight.
“Good-bye, Harry, my boy,” said George Reeves, as he shook me warmly by the hand, just as I was preparing to mount; “ take care of yourself; don’t be afraid of hard work or a little roughing,-and you’ll turn out a good bushman yet.”
I thanked him most cordially and gratefully for all his kindness to me, shook hands heartily with old Dick, and swung myself into the saddle. As soon as we had all mounted, the slip rails of the stockyard were let down, and the cattle all rushed out and set off down the track as though they had determined to bolt back to whence they came. The stock-whips rang out sharply, crack after crack, like so many pistol-shots, in the still, crisp morning air, and away we all went as hard as we could gallop, after the cattle, Dilly on one tack and Peter on the other, their horses prancing and curveting as the lash of the stock-whips curled round their flanks, without, however, touching- them. Ned Reeves and I brought up the rear, turning round simultaneously for one last look and farewell wave to good George Reeves, who stood at the paddock gate, shouting good wishes after us.
CA TTLE-EEO VEES.
167
How I did enjoy that day’s cattle-driving! The only thing which detracted from my perfect happiness was the envy I felt in watching the ease and skill with which Dilly and Peter cracked their long stock-whips. Ned Reeves’ whip hung, coiled up, to a hook in his saddle, and after watching the others flourishing theirs for some time—I shall always think they were showing off to the new chum, specially as Ned burst into one of his guffaws after a particularly brilliant series of reports—I ventured to ask him if he would lend me his whip to have a try with. But he would not hear of doing so, declaring that he did not wish to see me cut my own head half off, nor to behold my horse galloping home with an empty saddle on his back, which would be the least result to be expected. “You must learn on foot first, my boy, and then afterwards on horseback.” And as he spoke he took his whip off its hook, uncurled the long lash, and sent it whirling to right and left of him, without touching either his own horse or mine, bringing it down each time with a sharp report.
I promised myself to have a try on the first opportunity, and in the meantime rode along with only a switch in my hand, shouting, “Yah-hip ! yah-hip ! ” with the others, just to make believe that I was of some little assistance to the party. I don’t fancy the cattle minded my commands much, but still it was a novel and delightful experience to be riding through the bush on this charming winter’s morning. The wattle-
168
HARRY TRE VERTON.
trees were in full bloom, yellow as our gorse at home: the wild flowers looked like a Persian carpet on a giant scale, so varied and blended were the delicate little blossoms. I don’t suppose a real cattle-driver ought to have had eyes for such beauties, but it was all so new and enchanting to me, and formed, in every way, so pleasant a contrast to my solitary, dusty tramps in the summer’s arid heat. The grand forest trees, though far apart, one here and one there, still lent us shade enough to be agreeable as we rode slowly on, over hill and dale.
Now and again we put up a drove of kangaroos, who would gaze on us for a moment with a look of almost human surprise in their soft, beautiful eyes, and then bound away as if made of indiarubber, disappearing altogether in an incredibly short time.
After travelling for several hours in this leisurely fashion we came to a large grassy flat with a big pond or waterhole at its edge; it was a perfect spot for grazing, so the cattle were allowed to feed and rest, which they appeared glad to do, for, slow as had been our pace, the continuous travelling had evidently wearied and quieted them down, and they were now as manageable as so many sheep. We were glad enough, I can tell you, to get off our horses and stretch our legs, taking off our saddles and hobbling the horses. Dilly very soon had a fire blazing, and a “billy”
^BLtC LIBRARY OF W,<
CA TTLE-DRO VERS.
169
(everything seemed called “ billy ” in this country!) full of water, bubbling and boiling on it. Ned Reeves unpacked a saddle-bag, which had been filled with provisions by old Dick, and we all had a capital meal, for which nature and health had provided the best of sauces.
The couple of hours’ rest passed all too quickly, and we saddled up and continued our journey, with the cattle in front of us, till just before sundown, when a halt was called by Ned, and we camped for the night. I must admit that when I dismounted for the second time I felt very tired and stiff after the long day in the saddle, although we had only walked our horses most of the time. To my surprise, Dilly commenced his friendly offices by bringing me, after supper, an armful of “ black-boy ” rushes, on which I stretched myself willingly at full length, with a cheerful fire at my feet, putting my saddle under my head as a pillow in true bush fashion. That was all very well, but I was quite unprepared—it was not in the book, so to speak —for the strong smell of horse emitted by the said saddle.
I bore it for some time, but at last, when Ned Reeves began settling himself down near me, I could not help saying, “Look here, Ned,”—for he had insisted on my calling him so—“how am I to get rid of this smell of horse?”
“Why, by going to sleep, of course,” he cried, cheerfully.
HARRY TREVERTON.
170
“ The smell of horse, as you call it, isn’t nearly so bad when you get used to it. In fact, I’ve always found it rather soothing, for as a general rule when a man gets his head on his saddle like this he feels that his day’s work is done, but that there is another day before him ; and so he doesn’t trouble about smells, but just goes off like a top.”
I could not help laughing as I listened to this extraordinary recipe for getting rid of a smell. However, I only replied by Dilly’s formula of “ All right. Good night,” and I must have unconsciously acted on the advice immediately, for I remembered no more until daylight next morning, when Dilly woke me up by an invitation to breakfast, whilst the crackling sound and pleasant, resinous smell of the newly-lit fire seemed to make turning out an easy job.
CHAPTER XVI.
dead-man’s spring.
“ ^/’HERE is Mr. Ned ?” I asked, as I sat up and looked about me.
“ Ned and Peter walk, find-um bullock. He all run ’way last night; he want go back. By-um-bye Ned and Peter bring ’um back ’gain.”
“ Oh, the cattle have gone away during the night, have they ? ”
“ Yes, and you and me must have some breakfuss.”
I did not quite see the force of this argument, and suggested that we should wait for the others.
“ No ! ” cried Dilly, crossly ; “ come on. Pull-um out grub, and make-um tea.”
So I pulled out the grub, and, having ladled into each pannikin as much tea and sugar as would have kept an English household for a week, tea was made, and we sat down to breakfast, during which my black friend explained that when the cattle came in he and I would have to go on with them at once. And this proved to be the case, for in a couple of hours’ time we heard the stock-whips, m
172
HARRY TREVERTON.
and Ned and Peter came into camp, driving the cattle, who looked very hot and thirsty, before them.
“Confound the brutes!” exclaimed Ned as he jumped off his horse; “they had gone at least five miles before I caught them up, but I’ve made them travel, I can tell you! And now Peter and I will have some breakfast and give our horses a spell, while you and Dilly drive on, so as to lose no more time.”
The other two horses were grazing close by, so it was the work of only a few moments to catch them and saddle up. Just as I was mounting, Ned, to my great delight, handed me his stock-whip, with strict injunctions, however on no account to attempt to crack it, but to give an occasional underhand cut with it, just to let the cattle know I was not a mere dummy. I am firmly convinced that I owe the fact of my having survived to write these recollections of my early days to a strict obedience to Ned’s earnest commands.
Off we started, Dilly “Yah-hiping” and cracking kis stock-whip with as much noise as though half a dozen drovers were at work.
In rather less than an hour after we had started Ned and Peter overtook us, and we then quickened our pace, emerging at last from the forest and coming out on a vast sand-plain. Of course, I had never seen anything like it
DEAD-MAN’S SPRING.
i73
before, but at once thought of Captain Mayne Reid’s description of the rolling, endless American prairies. There was this marked difference, however, that whereas the prairies were said to be covered by high, even waving, grass, these sand-plains were at this time of year thickly dotted with scrub, and a perfect mass of beautiful wild flowers. But there was the same ocean-like formation; we appeared to rise on the crest of one long billow, only to descend into the valley on its farther side, and then up another low ridge, down again, and so on over and over again. The worst of it was there appeared to be no end to these waves of sand. As far as the eye could reach, all round, the view was precisely the same. It all looked like a dead level, until you reached it and found the eternal sand-billow rise up before you, but the smiling flowers were everywhere. Not a drop of water within miles and miles—no, not if one were to offer a thousand pounds for it!
“How I do hate these wretched sand-plains!” said Ned, quite savagely, even his sunny temper failing him. “This everlasting up-and-down work tires the cattle and horses ever so much more than double the distance over a hard, level country, and I guess we have a good ten miles more to cover before we reach Dead-man’s spring.”
“ What a horrible name! ” I cried. “ Why on earth do
they call it that ? ”
174
HARRY TRE VER TON.
“Well, it’s this way,” said Ned, who seemed to like to talk a little after our long silent stage; “ you see, the spring rises at the bottom of a small, narrow well, which had originally been dug out by natives. About ten years ago a white man and his native driver had managed to get their team across this plain to where we’re going, and, as a matter of course, were in a hurry for a drink by the time they reached the well. To their horror, they found a dead man—white, too—stuck fast in the well, head downwards. As you may suppose, it wasn’t a very pleasant business pulling him out, but they managed it. Then there was the grave to be dug for what was left of the poor fellow, and there he lies to this day, no one even knowing what had been his name.”
I had so recently suffered the torture of thirst myself, that I broke the silence which followed Ned’s grim story by asking, “And so the poor chaps had to go without their drink after all?” thinking of the teamster and his servant.
“Yes, indeed! The man told me himself how he and the native had to lie down and sleep, or try to sleep, within a hundred yards of the dead man. Their horses were so knocked up, they could not go a step farther that night, but the native brought the white man some sort of leaf to chew, so they managed to get through the night and reached
DEAD-MAN'S SPRING.
i75
home safely the next day, but from that time to this the place has always been called ‘ Dead-man’s spring.’ ”
“ Has any one an idea of how the poor man met his fate ? ” I said.
“ He must have lost his pannikin, I fancy, for I remember hearing that it could not be found anywhere. They searched the well, thinking it might have dropped in. There was a bit of rope by which he could have let down the pannikin if he had had one, but no pannikin was ever found either there or thereabouts, so the poor chap must have gone down head first himself for a drink. I daresay he was half crazy with thirst, and he may have had a fit hanging there with his head down, or else been too exhausted to work himself back to the surface, but no one knows.”
“Yes, I can well understand that the poor fellow preferred death with a drink first to going on without one,” I remarked, still thinking of my own dreadful experience, of which Ned knew nothing, for I could not even then bear to speak of it, and Mr. Reeves, I knew, had not mentioned it the evening of his brother’s arrival.
“Of course he did,” cried Ned, “and so would any man. You people living in countries like England talk about being thirsty! why there is not one in a thousand who knows even the meaning of the word. I remember once I had been travelling with sheep in some very hot weather,
176
HARRY TREVERTON.
when one night my mate and I arrived at a native well. Of course there was no water for the unfortunate sheep, but we knew we should be able to get enough for ourselves, and a couple of pannikins besides for each of the horses. Yes,” Ned said, in answer to my surprised face, “I can tell you I’ve seen horses drink out of a pannikin as neatly as possible, without spilling a drop. Well, my mate let down his pannikin first, and as he drew it up he made a wry face, but we were too thirsty to be particular, and we made some tea of the filthy stuff. We had to hold our noses and swallow it off as if it had been medicine. I pledge you my word of honour, Harry, I don’t understand how we were not poisoned on the spot. You hear of typhoid fevers and contaminated water, and all the rest of it. Why there were germs of every disease under the sun in that water. You must know it had been pitch dark when we drew it up, but next morning when we went to look it was enough to make one sick, I can tell you. There was a native dog, a snake, half a dozen kangaroos, rats, and several birds, all dead, and—well—stinking—in that hole,” and Ned made a gesture of disgust at even the recollection of that glimpse.
“ I suppose you did not make any more tea out of it ? ” I asked, full of sympathy, but not knowing very well what to say.
HEAD-MAN’S SPRING.
i77
“Tea! my dear boy,” cried Ned, with a short laugh of contempt; “ I’m glad you’ve found a name for it Tea, indeed! No, thank you! We had escaped so far, and we were not such fools as to tempt Providence again ; so we started as early as possible, all the earlier for not having any breakfast. We were in hopes of reaching a large water-hole ahead of us before the sun became too hot for the sheep to travel, but it would have been better for us if we had remained where we were, as it turned out, and not made that early start. After we had travelled for a couple of hours pretty comfortably, the sheep in front smelt water and began to run. Five minutes after that the whole flock, a thousand strong, were pelting along as hard as they could after their leaders, and what do you think was the result ? ”
“ I have not the faintest idea,” I replied.
“Well, it was just this—when my mate and I came up to the flock a few minutes later, you may imagine our jui horror at seeing the poor brutes kicking and struggling, ng, one on the top of the other, in the water-hole, where they were drowning and smothering each other in their terrible eagerness to get a drink. We did what we could to save them, but sheep are awkward customers to manage when they are rushing for water, and we had the greatest difficulty in saving any of them. As it was, we left four hundred dead in the pool.”
12
178
HARRY TREVERTON.
“ But had you no idea of what was going to happen ? ” I asked.
“ Of course not, for the simple reason that we had taken the precaution of sending on a dray laden with drinkingtroughs, as is always done here when one takes sheep across the sand-plains in summer-time. The mischief arose from the fact of the dray-horses having knocked up from thirst and heavy pulling, so instead of arriving a couple of days before we did, they had only been there two hours or so. There lay the troughs all in a heap, instead of being full of water and ready for the flock. We could not possibly know that, so it was a surprise, and an uncommonly disagreeable one too, let me tell you. The teamster and his mate tried their best to prevent the sheep from rushing into the pool, but they might just as well have tried to stop a torrent. So what with too much water for the sheep, and too little for the horses (for the dead bodies of the sheep completely choked up the water-hole), we lost in that day’s journey something like five hundred pounds’ worth of stock, and it took us a good year’s work to get back to the same position we had been in before we reached that water-hole ! However, it’s of no use crying over dead sheep any more than over spilt milk, so let us be thankful for small mercies, and one of them is that here we are at Dead-man’s Spring! ” and Ned flung himself out of the saddle> declaring that he was as tired as a dog.
DILLY CAUGHT ME IN HIS ARMS.
DEAD-MANS SPRING.
181
And so was I; as tired as forty dogs. When I dismounted, my cramped limbs felt absolutely useless to me, and I should certainly have fallen backwards had not Dilly, who happened to be passing at the time, caught me in his arms.
“Hulloa!” he cried, “what for you want-um lie down? I tink-um you too much drunk-fellow,” and he laughed merrily at his little joke, though all the time he was supporting me carefully and rubbing my legs.
“ Oh, Dilly, I am so tired ! ” I exclaimed.
“ Horse tired too,” said Dilly, sagely; “ you must take-um off saddle and bridle, let-um go and get-um grub.”
The necessity of doing this spurred me to renewed efforts to induce my legs to bear me, and I set about acting on Dilly’s suggestion, though I staggered about quite like a “drunk-fellow.” Whilst I was seeing to the comfort of my tired beast, Dilly was doing his best for my comfort, and soon brought me an armful of rushes, a bed of which is considered the height of luxury in camp life. I thought then, and often since, what a comfort it was to have these native lads who made the fires, boiled the water for tea, brought rushes for our beds, watered the horses, and laughed and joked with each other all the time, without the slightest sense of the fatigue which overpowered us. They love the outdoor life, and consider it the utmost luxury to find food and fodder provided for them and their steeds at the end of each day’s journey
HARRY TREVERTOH.
182
without having to seek these necessaries for themselves. What is to us a toilsome day’s travel, is to them little or nothing more than a picnic excursion.
When I had had a drink of water and stretched my benumbed limbs on my bush-bed, I could not help saying to Billy, as he came towards the fire, grinning merrily, with a bundle of firewood on his back,
“Billy, you are a very good fellow, and I like you very much.”
Billy laughed outright, and said, somewhat contemptuously,
“ Me nothing like-um you, you no good ; you too much drunk, very near tumble down;” and Billy commenced staggering and lurching about as I had done, laughing all the time. Peter joined him, and they both seemed delighted at the chance of deriding a new chum.
“Now then, you boys!” cried Ned, from the brink of the well, where he had been indulging in the luxury of a good wash, only attainable during these winter months when the well—a deep, narrow sort of tube in the ground— was full to the top, “clear out of that, and get the saddlebags, if you want any tucker to-night!”
Off they both ran, laughing and talking in a strange dialect to each other, as merrily as two children.
It was not long before our simple preparations were
DEAD-MAN'S SPRING.
183
made, and the “tucker,” anglicl food or supper, was ready. The darkness soon fell upon us, and the stars came out bright and clear by the time we had finished. Then, after smoking just one pipe apiece, we rolled ourselves in true bush fashion in our blankets by the side of a blazing fire. But I suffered such acute pain in all my limbs that I began to fear I was going to have an attack of rheumatism. However, it was only the effects of the long up and down hill ride, and at last I fell asleep, waking up next morning, stiff, indeed, but perfectly well and strong. We all ate a regular bushman’s huge breakfast of tea, damper, and cold mutton, saddled up, mustered our cattle, who had enjoyed the good feed and abundance of water as much as we had, and made an early start onwards from Dead-man’s Spring.
CHAPTER XVII.
ON ALL FOURS.
QNCE more we were travelling through forest country, which I certainly preferred to the sand-plain, but it was slow work. The cattle appeared to be getting tired of their journey, and we still had sixty miles before us, which Ned said would take about three more days. We should then reach “ Running River,” so named because the water in its bed is permanent, and runs all the year round : a rare merit in an Australian river.
I may as well admit at once that all the romance and pleasure I had attached to cattle-driving had evaporated before the end of the first day’s journey, and I should have been delighted to hear we had only six miles more to travel, instead of sixty. I had still, however, a novel and very unpleasant experience before me, for on the fourth day it began to rain, and in about half an hour we were drenched to the skin. The situation was by no means agreeable ; the water streamed off the backs of the cattle as they trudged wearily along; the poor tired horses looked as though they had just come out of a river ; and we were all, of course, wet through. I should not have cared much about that, had there been any 184
ON ALL FOURS.
185
prospect of reaching a house when our day’s journey was ended. But there was no dwelling nearer than the homestead at Running River, and it would take fully to-day and tomorrow to get there, for we were travelling at the rate of only twenty miles a day. All the fun and frolic appeared to be washed out of poor Dilly and Peter; their “ yah-hips ” sounded quite dismal, more like the croak of a frog than anything else, and even the crack of the stock-whip fell flat and dull on the ear. As for myself, I felt limp, tired, and generally miserable, for I was drenched through and through, and the only mental occupation which I could find was to institute a comparison between the two extremes of Australian travelling which had fallen to my lot. Whether it were better to be trudging alone along a hot dusty track to which there seemed no end, and with a heavy swag on one’s back and an incessant and raging thirst, or to be riding, as I was then doing—in pleasant company, it is true—through the bush, with one’s limbs aching from fatigue and cramp, and with the prospect of a wet lair at night and a wet journey next day.
“ Hulloa, Harry ! what are you thinking about ?” cried Ned suddenly ; “ you are looking uncommonly serious 1 ”
I did not like to disclose the profound melancholy and discouragement into which I had fallen, so I brisked up and said, as indifferently as I could, trying to appear more like a meteorological observer than a drenched traveller,
i86
NARRY TREVERTON.
“ I was just wondering how long this rain is likely to last! ” and as I spoke a gust of wind brought down a double showerbath on our heads from the trees overhead.
“ Well, I don’t know,” said Ned, trying to get his pipe alight, “ but let us hope it will last all day and all night too.”
I stared at Ned as he expressed what appeared to me a personally ill-natured wish, but as he looked quite cheerful and happy, riding along with the water streaming from every angle of his body, I asked him what he meant.
“What I mean is this,” said Ned, “forty-eight hours of steady rain like this means, in any Australian colony, many thousands of pounds to the settlers as a body, and many hundreds to individuals. Yes, my boy, this glorious downpour will give us more grass, more corn, plenty of water, and consequently a good clip, fat sheep and fat bullocks. For my part I hope it may last for a week; a dry season means poverty, and even ruin to some, besides affecting every one, more or less. For instance, which would you rather do, buy lean meat at eightpence a pound ” (Ned thought he was quoting famine prices for beef!) “or give fourpence for fat juicy steaks ? ”
“ I don’t know about myself,” I answered, laughingly, “for any way I suppose a shilling a day would feed me, but I know which my mother would rather do! ”
“Well, then, always pray for plenty of rain, and thank
ON ALL FOURS.
187
God when you get it 1 ” said Ned, with a friendly nod at me.
There was certainly great cause for thankfulness, from the grazier’s point of view, for the rain increased every
rain before it. I am forced to confess that, in spite of Ned’s way of looking at it, I could not feel cheerful inwardly as I sat in my saddle, drenched to the skin and numb with
188
HARRY TREVERTON.
cold. I had not even the satisfaction of reflecting on the probable diminution of my mother’s butcher’s bill, as she was too many thousand miles away, dear soul, for it to affect her pocket. I don’t believe the best mackintoshes that ever were made would have kept out that rain ; any way, we had nothing except monkey jackets, which soaked up the rain like sponges.
I suppose it was somewhere near sundown, had there been any sun to set, when Ned called a halt for the night, and the two native lads were soon busily engaged in lighting a huge fire, having first hobbled their horses. The piled-up logs caught fire quickly, in spite of the wet, so resinous were they, and the crackle and blaze put us all in good heart directly. The boys next set to work to build with astonishing rapidity a couple of beehive huts, out of “black-boy” rushes and large branches for rafters. Ned and I were glad enough to creep into one, bringing our steaming saddles with us, whilst Dilly and Peter took possession of the other. Blankets and all were soaking wet, and I could not help asking Ned how they and ourselves were to be dried. He suggested that we should each roll ourselves up in our blankets, and keep turning round to the fire, which blazed in front of the hut, so as gradually to get dry. He added that if I could not manage that, I must remember that a wet blanket was much warmer than a dry one.
ON ALL FOULS.
189
“ And what about catching cold ? ” I asked, disconsolately.
“ Oh, people never catch cold in the bush,” Ned cried, cheerfully; “ it’s only townsfolk who are subject to those sort of things ! ”
He was so bright and good-humoured amid all this dampness and misery, that I determined to make no complaints ; so the pannikins were put on the fire, and we had some tea and cold mutton. All the time we were eating I took Ned’s advice, and kept turning round, first one side and then the other, to the blaze, and was actually succeeding in getting comparatively warm and dry. Just as I began to congratulate myself on the improved aspect of affairs, Ned, who had been listening attentively to some outside sound, exclaimed, suddenly,
“ Confound those brutes of horses ! do you hear them ? ”
I listened, but what with the noise of the rain and the hissing and spluttering of the wood, could hear nothing at all suggestive of a horse’s movements, so I asked what the matter was.
“ The matter is simply this,” said Ned, with the first sign of ill-humour I had yet seen in his jolly face, “they are just hobbling off home! Come along, Harry, there’s no help for it; we must head them back and short hobble them, else we shall have to walk the rest of the journey.”
This was by no means a pleasant proposal. I had no
190
HARRY TREVERTON.
sooner begun to feel somewhat less miserable, than I had to start off in the rain again and relapse into my former wet and cold condition; but hesitation was impossible, so I threw my still steaming blanket as far inside the hut as I could, and off we started in the dark and downpour, Ned leaving orders with the native lads to cut us some more rushes for our beds and put them to dry inside the hut.
I was very nearly suggesting that it would have been a good plan to have sent the boys after the horses, but Ned anticipated me by remarking that probably they would have a long tramp after them in the morning, and that we ought to do our share this evening, so as to spare them as much as possible.
I could hear the horse-bells ringing away at a great rate in the far distance, but the sound did not appear to grow nearer as we tramped along; in fact, every moment it sounded fainttran I felt horribly disgusted at the whole business. It was bad enough, I thought, to be riding all day in the rain, without trudging all night after those stupid beasts.
I think even Ned was beginning to lose his temper, for he said, sullenly,
“ Confound those brutes! it’s a case of ‘ home, sweet home’with them. I’ve known that old fool Nelson hobble twenty miles in a night! We must catch them, and at
ON ALL FOURS.
191
all events shorten their hobbles; so we’d better run for it!”
This was worse and worse. Walking was difficult enough in the inky darkness and deluge of descending rain, so you may imagine how we blundered along, stumbling over logs, brought up every instant by thick bushes, till I hardly knew whether I were on my head or my heels. Certainly we deserved success, so persevering were we, for even after we got near the brutes they dodged us among the scrub, as if they were quite aware that their rambles were to be stopped.
“ I think they are pretty secure now,” said Ned, in a tone of satisfaction, as he raised himself stiffly up, after shortening the hobbles so that the runaways could hardly put one foot before the other; “if they would only feed about quietly, but they won’t, you’ll see—they’ll try a sort of gallop, and goodness knows where they’ll be in the morning! However, they must take their chance, and the next thing for us to do is to get back to camp as quickly as we can. Hadn’t you better go first, Harry ? ”
I laughed as well as I could at Ned’s little joke, though I doubted the fun of having to find our way back through such blinding rain and thick darkness, and I muttered something about the apparent impossibility of striking the track back to camp.
192
HARRY TREVERTON.
“That’s only because you have not been taking proper notice of things, young man, as a bushman should,” cried Ned, in his old cheery voice; “now I’ll just give you a lesson. And let me beg of you not to allow your attention to be distracted either by your fatigue or by the delightful rain which is falling so heavily. Now listen carefully. Had you kept your eyes open all this time you might have noticed that the track along which we have been travelling bears north and south, and that we’ve been going north, whilst the wind and rain have come from the westward. Well, then, we turned our back on them, didn’t we, when we came to look for these horses ? ”
“Yes,” I said; “but why didn’t the horses keep along the track and go north if they were heading for home ? ”
I felt this was very sharp of me, and Ned seemed to think so too, for he exclaimed,
“Well done, Harry! That’s a very good question, and the answer to it is this. Because the beggars were far too cunning to try any such move. Old Nelson thought to throw us off our guard by pretending to go out and feed ; but when we overtook them they were heading north as fast as they could go. We came out due east, so we must face the wind and rain, and go back to westward.”
“And do you think we shall be able to find the camp fire ? ” I asked, with all a new chum’s misgivings.
ON ALL FOURS.
i93
“We shan’t hit it straight off, if that’s what you mean,” said Ned; “but we must try to get hold of the track, and then see if we can’t follow it up to the fire.”
Just as he spoke a terrific flash of lightning nearly blinded us by its vivid suddenness, and was quickly followed by the crash of thunder all round us.
“Very good,” said Ned, composedly; “that means lots more rain, and another streak or two of fat; but we may as well get back to camp and enjoy it from the hut.”
So on we hurried in the teeth of the gale, with the inky blackness around occasionally cleft by the zigzag of the lightning flashes; and even amid the roar of the tempest we could now plainly hear the crash of falling trees on either side.
We walked thus for nearly an hour, and Ned remarked that we must now be within a quarter of a mile from the track, and that on no account must we miss it.
“ That’s all very well,” I said, feeling as if all hope and courage were being rapidly washed out of me, “ but how upon earth are we to see a narrow track when I can’t see you, and wouldn’t know you were next me if it wasn’t for your voice ? ”
“ Of course we can’t see it,” declared Ned ; “ we’re not cats ! We must feel for it, and very carefully too, so here goes ; ” and down he dropped on his hands and knees in all the mud and slush, and crawled along, patting the ground as he went.
13
194
HARRY TREVERTON.
I walked behind him, as though I were driving a pig to market, and, as if he were acting the situation, he gave a sort of grunt every now and then. Wretched as I felt, it was impossible to help laughing, though most certainly I did not enjoy the joke.
After a bit, Ned raised himself up and said, “Now, Harry, down you go, and mind you pat very carefully, and if you even think you’ve got the track, sing out directly.”
So down I went, and shuffled along on all fours in a very miserable state of mind, but all the time patting the ground, first with one hand and then with the other.
“What on earth are you grunting for?” asked Ned, rather crossly, presently.
“ I didn’t know I was grunting,” I gasped; “ but as I feel exactly like a half-drowned pig, I suppose the grunt came naturally.” Whereupon I was informed that unless we managed to find either the track or the fire, we should both feel very much like half-dead pigs before morning.
Just then I went up to my elbows in a pool of water, and reported accordingly.
“ I think we are all right, then. Just go up it for a few yards,” said Ned in exactly the tone of voice he might have used had he been inviting a young lady to take a moonlight stroll. So I went up it, and it went up me about eighteen inches, more or less, till I thought I should have been
SHUFFLING ALONG ON ALL FOURS.
ON ALL FOURS.
i97
drowned, and at last Ned said he was satisfied the track had been found, or rather the water that covered it, and now the only question to decide was whether we were north or south of the camp.
I really believe that, had we not at that moment heard a loud coo-ee, we should have turned our backs on it; but the moment the welcome sound met our ears, we turned exactly round and splashed along the gutter-like path, until in a few moments the camp fire seemed to rise out of the gloom before us. Never was sight more welcome to drenched tramps, and Dilly, who was comfortably smoking his pipe, but to whose opportune coo-ee we owed our safety, said, with a grin,
“ Hulloa, Harry I Yesterday you very near drunk; to-day you very near dead. Never mind, you directly all right, you have-um hot-fellow tea.”
So I had some “ hot-fellow tea,” and very delightful it tasted; then I took off nearly all my wet clothes, rolled myself in a nice warm damp blanket, and was asleep io less than two minutes.
CHAPTER XVIII.
THE CATTLE-STATION.
WHENIawoke next morning the rain had cleared off, and the sun shone brightly, so I sat up and rubbed my eyes. They presently disclosed to me the amazing spectacle of Ned parading about in front of the fire drying our clothes, which he had hung across a stick supported by two forked branches. His costume was simplicity itself, consisting only of his rug, which he had fastened round his neck, and which fell in folds to his knees.
I watched him for some time with much amusement, for his difficulties in preventing the various garments from falling into the fire were great. But I feared to speak, lest he should call upon me to come to his assistance. The idea of us both striding about in such an absurd fashion struck me as being so ridiculous that at last I could not prevent myself from bursting into a sudden roar of laughter.
“ Hulloa, young man! you’re awake, are you? Now just come out of that and take your turn at drying these clothes,” said Ned, and as he spoke he made a hasty step backwards, rubbing his shins gingerly.
“No, thank you,” I replied; “you look so nice and are
198
THE CATTLE-STATION.
i99
doing it so well yourself, that I hardly think any assistance is necessary! ”
“ It’s all very well to talk about doing it so nicely,” grumbled he, “but do you know that the fire is roasting my shins off, and I want to cool them a bit ? ”
“Why don’t you let down your blanket a little more?” I asked, still giggling.
“Why? Because I couldn’t move if I did, and I’ve been dancing a regular war-dance round this fire for an hour or more! Look here, Harry, if you have any sense of fair play in you at all, you’ll come and take a turn at this work now ! ”
Thus adjured, I crawled out of my comfortable nest, draped my blanket around me as best I could, and took charge of the laundry, whilst Ned turned in and took his ease, keeping up a running fire of remarks on my personal appearance, especially about the legs. At last I could stand his criticisms and the scorching heat no longer, and proposed that we should each put on our clothes and dry them on our backs.
Ned agreed to this, for he was tired of his blanket costume, and hungry besides, so we dressed, made some tea, and were just sitting .down to breakfast, when we heard the welcome discord of the jingling horse-bells, and in another minute or two Dilly and Peter rode into camp, each leading a horse besides, whilst old Toby the pack-horse brought up the rear, following his mates as steadily as a sheep-dog.
200
NARRY TREVERTON.
“Well done, boys! where did you find’em ?” asked Ned, evidently as surprised as pleased at seeing the horses brought back to camp so quickly.
“He nothing too far ’way walk,” said Hilly; “too much hoggy-fellow; he nothing gallop-um; me and Peter directly catch-um.”
“All right then,” said his master; “now look sharp and get some tucker, for the sooner we are off the better ! ”
So we bolted our food, swallowed our tea scalding hot, saddled up the horses, mustered the cattle, and in half an hour we were once more on our way.
After travelling a few miles farther we came once more to a sand-plain, but it was quite level and dotted here and there with clumps of banksia-trees, covered with beautiful bright yellow flowers which resembled nothing so much as those round hair brushes with which they clean out bottles. As Dilly and Peter rode along I noticed that they occasionally broke off one of these bottle-brush-like blossoms and sucked it with apparent relish. I did the same and found the queerlooking flower to contain the most delicious honey I ever tasted.
Herds of kangaroo bounded away from us in every direction, and in spite of my fatigue I felt eager to go after them, but the poor horses were far too tired for any extra work. Once the temptation was nearly irresistible, for we came
THE CATTLE-STATION.
201
suddenly on two big boomers having a regular stand-up fight, advancing, retreating, and striking at each other in true pugilistic fashion. Their friends squatted on their haunches in a ring round the combatants, and apparently took so deep an interest in the issue that they did not notice us until a sharp crack from Dilly’s stock-whip sent them flying across the plain, no doubt to renew the battle in a more secluded place.
Not long after this, Ned pointed to a line of tall trees in the distance, which he said (to my deep satisfaction) marked the course of the river on whose banks his homestead stood. How anxiously I watched that long serpentine belt of dark green trees, but they never seemed any nearer, and it was quite late in the evening when we suddenly dipped down from the table-land of the sand-plain to a beautiful grassy “ flat,” with tall trees growing in clumps over its wide expanse, and lovely wild flowers spread like a carpet over its green surface. The river, swollen by the winter rains, and filled from bank to bank, rushed—a mighty torrent—down to the distant sea, and gave a totally different character to the scene. In this land of plenteous grass we left the poor tired cattle and pressed on to the house.
I confess that, as I swung myself out of the saddle at Ned Reeves’ door, I felt deeply thankful the journey was ended, for my powers of endurance had been taxed to the utmost. I was but young, and, until I came to Australia, hardship had
202
STARRY TREVERTON.
been unknown to me; it was not, therefore, always easy to bear the extremes of fatigue and hunger and discomfort of all sorts without a murmur, but I was thankful to reflect I had done so, and was entitled to my well-earned rest after a hundred miles on horseback.
I do not know what sort of castle in the air had gradually been building itself up in my mind as the house on the cattlestation, but, at all events, the whole fabric tumbled down with a crash as we rode up to a sort of hovel with mud walls about six feet high, and a paper-bark roof. I could not help exclaiming, “Is this the cattle-station?” as Ned drew rein and stiffly dismounted before his lowly door. In spite of my wish to conciliate my new friend, I fear the tone of my voice must have betrayed my discouragement, but Ned’s good-humour was proof against all trials, and he threw himself into the attitude of a showman, and in an absurd, burlesque manner pointed out his surroundings, winding up with, “To your left you may perceive two very strong stockyards, capable of holding the most cantankerous bullocks that ever wore horns, whilst away over there you may see a patch of young wheat which we hope some day to eat as bread ; and, by-the-way, we may as well come in and see if there is any supper to be had.”
To this practical suggestion I was more than ready to give my best attention, and as we unsaddled our horses, a rough-
THE CATTLE-STATION.	203
looking lad, riding a shaggy Timour pony, came cantering up to the door.
“Hulloa, Johnnie! how has everything been going on? plenty of rain, hey ? ”
“ The cattle’s all right, sor, an’ there’s bin a power o’ rain,” said Johnnie, taking off his saddle as he spoke ; “ but it’s been terrible lonesome. That black thief o’ the world, Geordie, took his hook the very day after you and Dilly left, and in course Nelson and Lassie followed him, so I haven’t had so much as a dog to bear me company.”
“Then how did you manage for kangaroo without the dogs ? ” asked his master.
“ Well, sor, he come back two or three times with some billy, and by dat same token he wor here last night wid some, so you can have a bit o’ mate for your tay.”
“ All right, my boy, look sharp and let us have some tea as soon as you can, for we are about starving.”
So Johnnie hustled about, made up a good fire, put the kettle on, and fried some kangaroo steak with rashers of bacon, off which, with the invariable tea and damper, we made a capital meal.
“How long has that poor lad been here by himself?” I asked.
“ Rather more than a fortnight,” answered Ned; “but it’s just the way with those niggers. The man who was left
204
HARRY TREVERTON.
here to hunt for the station no doubt went off because he too didn’t like the loneliness, for the natives are very fond of company, but most likely he’ll return to-morrow or next day; if not I shall have to send Dilly for the dogs, else we’ll run short of meat. I haven’t salt enough just now to make it worth while to kill a bullock, and we have not either pigs or poultry as yet on the station. All in good time, but we must just rough it a bit, and at all events there are lots of potatoes and other vegetables.”
I professed my perfect readiness to make the best of what was going in the way of food, and went on to inquire about the work. In answer to my questions, Ned said,
“Dilly will have to ride round the cattle every day to make sure that they don’t stray; Johnnie will help, but he is also head cook and bottle-washer. You and I have very hard work before us; we must fell trees, split them into posts and rails, and fence in the wheat crop before it grows high enough to tempt stock. Then there will be the cattle to muster and brand and ear-mark. By the time that job is over the wheat will be ready to be reaped and threshed. Don’t be afraid, my boy, there’s lots to do! But we had better turn in now.”
Just as Ned nodded a friendly good night, he stopped at the door to say, half over his shoulder, “ I don’t mind telling you that you’ve come out of that journey uncommon
THE CATTLE-STATION.	205
'*£200 LiaftARY Or ^^
well for such a youngster, and if you stick to hard work like that I’ll stick to you, and make such a man of you that any squatter will be glad to give you a good billet and pay you well into the bargain.”
These words of praise and encouragement were extremely pleasant to me, and, dog-tired as I felt, I turned in with a full heart, said my prayers (for the first time in quiet for a week I), and slept like the proverbial top until a chorus of “ break-o’-day boys,” mingling with the rushing music of many waters, roused me from dreamland to the scarcely less glowing reality of early morning at Running River cattle-station.
CHAPTER XIX.
BUSH LIFE.
y^S I was dressing I heard Ned ask Johnnie what day of the week it was.
“Sorra a bit o’ me knows, sor,” replied Johnnie, in a tone which showed he was rather aggrieved at so difficult a question being put to him.
“Why, what a young heathen you must be!” cried Ned; “ don’t you know it’s Sunday ? ”
“ ’Deed, an’ I don’t, sor; sure, an’ how wud I know, wid never a chapel nor priest within a hundred mile of us ? ”
Chapel or no chapel, I was uncommonly glad to hear we had a whole day to rest before beginning the hard work which I guessed pretty correctly lay before us. So we had breakfast, another sleep before the midday dinner, then a ramble round the station, an early supper of some excellent kangaroo-tail soup, thickened with vegetables, and then to bed. I may mention here that was the usual way of spending Sunday in the bush, but I must not forget to add that I kept a sacred promise made to my dear mother, and I always read a chapter or two in my pocket Bible. I would recommend. every young man to do the same, for I 206
BUSH LIFE.
207
know by experience that the dear old Book will soften his feelings of isolation as nothing else can, and be like the voice of an old familiar friend to him, when he is far from home-friendship.
On Monday morning we breakfasted at daylight, Hilly and Johnnie starting directly after, armed with their stockwhips, to look after the cattle. Ned and I loaded ourselves with mauls, wedges, and a cross-cut saw, and we went in search of a tree suitable for converting into posts and rails. We had not far to seek, for the timber was untouched, my friend’s station being on the very outposts of the scanty civilization.
“ I think this fellow will do,” said Ned, at last, glancing up at a beautiful red gum-tree, amid whose blossom-laden boughs a whole host of parrots were screeching and fluttering. I could not help saying what a pity it seemed to cut down so splendid a tree.
“Perhaps so,” answered Ned, dryly, “but it would be a still greater pity to have the cattle trampling down my beautiful green wheat for want of a fence.”
He was busy greasing the cross-cut saw as he spoke, and after a moment’s pause, called out,
“Now, Harry, catch hold! keep your hand up, and draw the saw smoothly to and fro without any jerking.”
So at it we went, first on the side towards which the tree
208
HA RUY TREVERTON.
should fall, and then on the opposite side, to meet the first cut, and so complete the circle. It was hard work, and no easy matter to keep stroke with my powerful mate who constantly cried, “Keep your hand up, don’t jerk; a long, steady stroke does it. Keep her going! ”
This last recommendation was quite superfluous, for not only did we keep “her” going, but “she” kept me going until I was ready to drop, and at last, in sheer desperation, called out for a spell. This was granted, but only to the extent of three minutes, and then on we went again.
“Now, Harry,” said Ned, who was himself beginning to pant, “in two minutes we shall hear the fibres begin to crack; then you must put on all steam and saw away like mad till I tell you to let go; then leave the saw to me and run back, as it sometimes happens that the stem of a tree, instead of falling clear of the butt, glances backwards along it, and if that happened, and either of us was struck--” (Ned had to pause for breath here, and I was only too glad of a moment’s rest)—“Well, I once knew a man who used to pride himself on being able to watch a tree so carefully that, no matter how it fell, he could keep close up and dodge it. One day, however, the boughs of the tree he was felling caught in a branch close by, the huge stem canted suddenly, shot backwards, struck him on the head and killed him, poor chap, on the spot! ”
BUS 17 LIFE.
209
This was certainly not a well-chosen story, for not only was I already exerting myself to the very utmost of my strength, but I must “put on more steam” if I wished to escape being crushed to death. However, there was nothing for it but to keep cool (figuratively speaking), and obey orders, so at it we went again, and were sawing with all our might when the tree gave a tremendous crack, closely succeeded by others. “ Stick to her 1 ” shouted Ned, and we sawed for dear life. Crack, crack, crack in quick succession. “Let go!” yelled Ned. I did not require a second bidding but ran backwards, keeping my eyes fixed on the huge tree with a sort of fascination. It swayed gently for a moment, then made a sudden swoop, and came with such a crash to the ground that the earth shook beneath our feet.
Ned, who had kept his hold of the saw as he walked backwards from the falling tree, looked at me with a smile on his face.
“Why, Harry, you arc all of a tremble! What’s the matter ? ”
“ Hard work and excitement,” I answered, rather crossly. “ I hope you don’t think I am frightened ? ”
“ Frightened! no, not a bit of it! ” he replied cheerfully. “ I’ve seen many a fellow run backwards at the very first crack and declare the tree was going to fall on top of him. I think you’ve shown very fair pluck, and a little more 14
21o HARR Y THE KEETON.
practice will give you confidence and make a first-rate sawyer of you.”
This speech soothed me somewhat, and so, wiping the perspiration from my streaming face, I went with Ned up to the fallen tree. It measured just three feet through, but no time could be spared to examine or admire it further, and we set to work at once, first to knock off some of the bark, and then to begin cutting it into lengths of nine feet, and we kept hard at this work until dark, which fortunately closed in early at this time of year. Our day’s toil had only been broken by one real rest, the half-hour allowed for a sort of lunch of tea and damper. The weather, too, was cool, or I really don’t think I could have stood the test of the severe strain on my growing frame and half-trained muscles.
I was indeed thankful, when we reached the cottage, to hear Johnnie say that supper was ready and waiting. We had a bathe, cold as it was, in the river, and then sat down to a splendid stew of kangaroo, thickened with vegetables grown on a small patch of ground at the back of the house. Trivial as this detail may seem to those unacquainted with the monotony of “bush” fare, it made a great difference in our health and comfort to be able to eat as many potatoes, onions, carrots, and so forth, as we chose, and I only mention it to encourage young settlers to start a vegetable garden
I WAS NEARLY ABREAST OF DILLY.
.BUSH LIFE.
2I5
as soon as possible, for it will amply repay the extra toil and trouble it entails at first.
For days and weeks Ned and I worked at felling and splitting up trees. Then followed boring, morticing, and putting up the fence round the wheat-field, all very hard work, but I gradually became accustomed to it, and accepted my position quite cheerfully, making a virtue of necessity. I must say, in justice to Ned Reeves, that although he exacted a full share of labour from me, he never spared himself, and was at all times perfectly kind and considerate towards me. Some days he would give me a change of work by sending me with Dilly to look up the cattle, and I used to enjoy these rides amazingly.
On such occasions we would start early in the morning and canter along the beautiful flats covered with grass and bright blossoms of the different varieties of everlastings. Pink, yellow, white, like large, ox-eyed daisies, all combined to make a brilliant pattern on the green grass. We visited the different “ mobs ” of cattle, driving them up or down the river, as might be necessary.
It was on one of those pleasant days when we had finished our work with the cattle, and were returning quietly home by a short cut across a bit of sand-plain, that a large emu suddenly jumped up from the ground on which it had been squatting, and began to run.
2 l6
J/ARRY TRE VER TON.
Now, it was strictly against orders to hunt kangaroo when we were looking up cattle; but as emus had not been mentioned, 1 suppose Dilly thought he was quite within his rights when he started off at full gallop after the great bird. My old stock horse became excited, and set off after his mate as hard as he could put legs to ground. I tried in vain to hold him in; he had evidently entered into the spirit of the chase, and I might as well have taken a pull at a stone wall. ■ There was nothing for it but to sit well back and keep a firm grip with my knees.
In the meantime the emu had been speeding along at an astounding pace; but I observed that Dilly was gradually lessening the distance between them, and at last he and his horse were fairly alongside of the game. True, he had neither gun nor rifle, but the stock-whip was uncurled, and the long lash flew out like a pennant, lassoing the emu's neck as neatly as possible, and bringing it to the ground almost directly in front of the horses, for I was nearly abreast of Dilly by this time. The young savage was off his horse in the twinkling of an eye, and after one well-planted kick on the poor creature’s head, which completely stunned him, set to work to beat its brains out with a stick, shouting at every blow, “What for you too much run?” As the emu was, happily, stone dead by this time, neithcr the blows nor the question troubled it much, and, in spite
BUSH LJFE.
217
of the small share I had taken in the chase, I felt very proud of my first emu.
“Now, Dilly,” said I, pulling out my large clasp-knife, “off with his skin, and I will take home some of the meat.”
“Nothing skim-um ! ” cried Dilly, most decidedly.
“ What foi' nothing skin-um ? ” I asked.
“ I think you too much fool, Harry. What for you want Ned to see-um skin ? He too much sulky.”
“Good gracious!” I exclaimed in astonishment, “what did you gallop after the brute for if you thought Ned would be sulky ? ”
This was a poser for Master Dilly, who appeared to be turning the question carefully over in his mind. At last he held out his hand for the knife, which I unsuspectingly gave him, offering to hold his horse, but my black friend had no such intention, and in an instant he had leaped on his horse’s back, and was a hundred yards off, waving my knife and shouting, “You skin-um now, Harry! go on, you skin-um now! ”
For a moment I was too much astonished at the fellow’s impudence to do aught but stare at him. He would not return me my knife, however, and neither threats nor expostulations had any effect on his determination to prevent my possessing any evidence of our transgression of rules. There was nothing for it but to mount my horse also, and
2 l8
HARRY TRE YER YOH
ride home. On the way he kept offering me back my knife on condition that I would not tell Ned. To this I made no answer, and as soon as we reached home told the whole story to his master, who took it very good-humouredly, and laughed at my discomfiture. Of course I volunteered to engage that there should be no more galloping of tired horses after game, at least on my part, and if I could help it (which I really could not in this case).
For days after, Dilly, in spite of the scolding which was his portion, went about singing some unintelligible words of his own to the tune of one of the monotonous chants of his tribe. It appears he had composed the ballad expressly for the occasion, and when he favoured me with a translation of the chorus or refrain, it turned out to be,
“ I killed a long-legged fool of an emu, But he not such a great big fool as you ! ”
Next day Geordie brought in the skin of the emu, pegged it out, and scraped it with glass. Eventually I packed it up with lots of pepper, and sent it home, but the scent was so high that the custom-house officers thought they had got hold of a dead dog, and my mother said visitors used to be invited to admire it in the garden.
CHAPTER XX.
BUSH SPORT.
'yHE winter had now passed away, the last post and rail had been put round the wheat-field, which, by-the-way, gave promise of a magnificent crop—and the cattle were getting into splendid condition.
One morning Ned, to my great delight, said that as we had been working very hard for a long time past, he thought we had earned a short holiday.
“ We’ll just lock up the place,” he continued, “ leave old Geordie and his woman in charge, and be off to the Karkan Lakes, get a supply of ducks, and from there take the boat in the bullock team down to the sea-beach opposite Seal Island. It will be combining business with sport, for sealshooting is good sport, and we want the blubber for lampoil.”
This was, indeed, a delightful prospect to a lad of my age, and I was obliged to let off some of my superfluous happiness by telling Lilly and Johnnie at once. Their rapture was even greater than my own, and they wanted to start off that instant, and bring in the working bullocks from the far end of the run.
219
220
NARRY TREVERTON.
On the following morning Ned and 1 put away our wedges and mauls, and prepared for our expedition by baking a huge “ damper,” boiling a large piece of salt pork, and hunting up bags in which to put our tea and sugar, pepper and salt, and so forth.
At sundown the boys brought in the four working bullocks, and our preparations being now complete, there remained nothing to do except turn in early for a good night’s sleep. I, for one, wished it were morning, and I seemed to get my wish directly I laid my head on the pillow, for my dreamless, sound sleep was put a stop to at earliest dawn by Dilly and Peter’s loud voices shouting to the bullocks by name.
“Come hither, Duke! Come hither, Strawberry!”
I jumped out of bed, and my first glance out of window showed me that the animals had already got their yokes on, and the lads were leading them round to the cart, which stood, ready packed, in front of the little house. So I dressed rapidly, bolted my breakfast, and was in time to help with the final preparations, consisting chiefly of guns and ammunition. Old Geordie, the native hunter, received his final caution not to leave the station until we came back, and Ned, Johnnie, and I scrambled into the dray, whilst Dilly, at the head of his team, gave a tremendous crack with his stock whip, and an encouraging shout of
BUSI/ SPORT
221
“Now, then, my lads!” and we were fairly off on our well-earned holiday trip.
The road—properly speaking there was none—to the sea lay across the sand-plain, so we had none of the inconveniences from the scrub on a bush track, but the sand was heavy, and the motion of the dray resembled at times that of a ship at sea. Dilly handled his unwieldy team with great dexterity, guiding them wonderfully well with many “Gees!” and “Come hithers!” but still the jolts were many and great. However, I was far too eager and happy to care in the least "about them, and we were all in the highest spirits as we bumped and thumped along through the brilliant sunshine and delicious, fresh, crisp air.
After travelling at the rate of a couple of miles an hour for some five or six hours, we skirted a belt of forest country, descended a short incline, and suddenly came on to the margin of a beautiful lake. It must have been something like three miles long by about one mile broad, and you could not desire to behold a fairer spot than that on its banks, where we made our camp, lit a fire, and sat down to a hearty meal. The bullocks seemed to enjoy the water and feed too, and we were all perfectly happy. At first we were too hungry to admire the scene, but after the sharpest edge of my huge bush appetite had been taken off, I could not help asking Ned why he had not built his homestead
222
HARRY TREVERTON.
(for we were still on his run) in this lovely spot. Ned’s mouth was still full of clamper, but he shook his head, and presently said,
“ Because I don't want to be eaten up alive by mosquitos, my boy, and because I don’t want to have a mud flat, with an unapproachable water-hole in the middle, to look at all summer. When it comes to your turn, Harry, to take up country, or buy a run, or a farm, or what not, you just remember my advice and take a look at the place in summer as well as winter; there’s a lot of difference, I can tell you! The lake is uncommon jolly as we see it now, full of water up to the edge, with all those duck and swan paddling about over there, but I wouldn’t sleep in this identical spot three months hence, no, not for a pound a night, and that’s a good deal for a poor man to say.”
I longed to ask why, and hear, perhaps, a story, but there was no time. After we had finished eating, Ned loaded the gun and gave it to Dilly, with instructions to go and get some ducks, so off he started, looking very important, Johnnie and I following humbly in the rear.
We had not gone far before Dilly came to a dead stop, and, crouching down, held up his hand as a sign for us to do the same. Now we also wanted to see what was going-on, so we dropped on hands and knees and crawled up to our sportsman, who, by the time we had reached him, had
BUSH SPORT.
223
stripped himself of every particle of clothing, and stood before us a veritable young savage.
“What do you see, Dilly?” I asked, trying to get a peep over his shoulder as he stood behind a little promontory of rock, carefully watching what was going on round the corner.
“My word! plenty duck get down! You see um! ”
When Dilly said “ My word ” in that particular tone of voice, I knew there must be something very delightful infront, so 1 peeped carefully over his shoulder and saw an immense flock of ducks, about three hundred yards off, waddling about the beach, preening themselves with great complacency, in happy ignorance of Master Dilly’s murderous intentions.
“ Lend-um knife! ” whispered he; so I handed him my knife, with which he cut a thick wattle-bough, and then, having cautioned us not to speak or move, began to advance towards the ducks in a stooping posture, screening his body carefully with the bough in one hand while he held the gun in the other. It was certainly very exciting to watch his tactics. The ducks were evidently perfectly unconscious of approaching harm, but a louder quack than usual, or an unexpected movement, would bring him to a standstill in a moment. The wattle-bush would appear to be growing out of the ground, so motionless did it become, until confidence was restored, when it would move slowly and
224
HARR F TRE TER TO A'.
steadily on again, death and destruction lurking behind its innocent-looking boughs.
“I say, Johnnie, how much closer does that fellow mean to get to those ducks? Does he intend to make them fly by poking them up with the barrel of his gun?” I asked.
“Mould your whisht!—not a bit of a fly at all, at all, till he lets fly among them his own self wid powther an’ shot,” replied Johnnie in a stage whisper.
“What, do you mean to say he is going to let drive at them in a heap on the ground?” I asked.
“ In coorse he is ! Look out! bedad, and dat's wid ’em ! ” At the same instant we heard two sharp reports, which were followed by such a yell from the sportsman that I thought he must really have shot himself in some mysterious fashion.
But he was all right, and by the time we reached him he had flung away both gun and bough, and was dancing among the dead and wounded birds, evidently intent upon securing those who appeared trying to make their escape to the water.
Johnnie and I had raced each other to the place, and, when we bad helped Dilly to collect and secure his victims, we counted no less than twenty-five ducks, a very good bag indeed for two shots; but then the gun had been heavily charged, the sportsman unconscionably close, and
HUSH SPORT. 225
the birds as thick as peas. However, we loaded ourselves with the game, and marched proudly back to camp, where we found Ned fast asleep; but I soon roused him up to exhibit the game and detail Dilly’s rather unsportsmanlike method of operations.
“My dear fellow,” replied Ned, “a black fellow’s idea of shooting is always to do the greatest amount of execution with the least possible trouble. I doubt very much whether given a gun and a wattle-bush, you or I could have done as well in a couple of shots, so let us pluck the birds and be thankful. We’ll just live on ducks and damper for a few days, so that when we get back to kangaroo it will be quite a pleasant change.”
This was Ned’s philosophy; whatever was was best, according to him, and you couldn’t have abetter creed for the bush, at all events. So we all set to work to pluck the birds, and by the time my half dozen were as bare as I could get them, I had had about enough of it, I can tell you.
After we had rested and idled about a bit, we started to look for the dingey, which Ned had carefully stowed under some wattle-bushes last season. She was in fair order, and half an hour after we had launched her was quite water-tight. A couple of pannikins soon baled out the water she had taken in just at first, and then we paddled off to some small bulrush islets which were dotted about
15
226
HARRY TREVERTON.
the lake. These were evidently the favourite nesting-places of the black swans, and we took some dozens of eggs without scruple, for there were scores of them. Ned shook his eggs carefully, and put back those which were nearly hatched; but we youngsters were not so scientific or so particular; and later on, when Johnnie missed his stroke and crashed backwards among the eggs, the result was rather dreadful, both to eyes and nose. Even Ned, the good-humoured, was so put out by the evil-smelling mess, that he sentenced Johnnie at once, as a punishment for his clumsiness, to wash the boat out. The result of this occupation was that Johnnie refused the offer of roast eggs for supper; but Dilly ate the double share, and it was terrible to see the young savage devouring the chicks which would have left the eggs in a day or two. He roasted them on the embers, and offered some to Ned and me! We declined, but did very well on roast duck, and were just about to turn in for the night when Ned called upon Dilly and me to go after the bullocks. For some time past the sound of their bells had been getting fainter and more distant.
“ Come on,” said Dilly ; “ you and me run, big-fellow run.” The reader will have studied Dilly’s method of dealing with the Queen’s English to little purpose if he has not discovered that by “ big-fellow run ” he meant to suggest a
BUSH SPORT.
227
race, or at least a rapid pace, so off we started. If I could have foreseen that I should have* been called upon so soon to take a “ big-fellow run,” I should not have eaten so much roast duck, but there was no help for it, and we held on at a good pace for at least half an hour before we overtook our team, making steadily for home. We headed them back, and made the best of our way into camp, when I lost no time in rolling myself up in my blanket and going off to sleep by the fire, amid the clang of the four bullock bells.
CHAPTER XXI.
WE GO SEALING.
yyHEN I awoke next morning Johnnie told me that the bullocks had again rambled off during the night, and that Ned and Dilly had gone to bring them back ; so I had plenty of time to run down to the lake and have a delicious swim. I returned to camp as hungry as a hunter, and quite ready for breakfast. Fortunately I had not long to wait, for the bullocks had been brought back during my short absence, and Dilly, to prevent mistakes, had yoked them up to the waggon. There they stood, with half-closed eyes, patiently chewing the cud, as though to walk off and leave us in the lurch would be the very last thing likely to occur to their innocent bovine minds.
The delightful smell of broiled duck once more mingled with the fragrant odours of the branches and twigs which were cooking it; and, the water in the “billy” having boiled, we sat down to as jolly a bush-breakfast as anyone could wish for. In fact, our camp would have made a charming picture, presenting the poetic side of an Australian settler’s life. The grass on which we sat was close and green, and literally gemmed with flowers; overhead the 223
IKE GO SEALING.
229
tall trees, covered also with blossom, lent us a grateful, quivering shade; and the foreground was sufficiently picturesque with tall rushes fringing the shore of the beautiful blue width of lake which stretched as far as we could see from our lowly position. The cart and oxen helped to give a touch of life to the sylvan scene, and vivid colour was supplied by our red blankets, which, in true bush fashion, dangled to air from the lowest boughs.
When we had finished breakfast, and packed away the provisions and blankets in the cart, Dilly drove it down to the lake, and we managed, with some difficulty, to hoist the dingey into it. Each man then cut himself a stout bludgeon, and we started for the seabeach. The road, or rather track, now passed through quite different country—barren sand-hillocks, which, sterile as they looked, must have afforded some sort of food to the countless number of kangaroo which each crack of Billy’s whip sent bounding away to right and left. After a couple of hours of this slow progress we came in sight of a higher ridge of sand-plain, glistening like snow in the sunshine; and beyond that again, after we had creaked and ploughed our way through the white, heavy sand, lay the Indian Ocean, dancing and tumbling beneath the midday sun. I venture to say that the first thought which rose simultaneously in each man’s mind as we both looked at the
230
JE4EEY TEEVEETON.
boundless stretch of heaving indigo-blue water, was of the dear and distant home which lay beyond ; but there was no time for sentiment. Our day’s journey was happily ended and over, and now the boat had to be taken out of the waggon and dragged to the water’s edge.
No sooner were the bullocks unyoked—very thirsty the poor brutes looked, with drooping heads and lolling tongues —than Ned took a spade, and, much to my surprise, began digging in the sand at the foot of one of the sand-hills, and very soon had scooped out a good-sized shallow pond, which almost immediately became filled with beautiful fresh water. The oxen lost no time in plunging their dusty muzzles into the blessed liquid, and when I expressed my amazement at a spring of fresh water existing so close to the edge of the sea, Ned told me that many a shipwrecked crew had died of thirst on that terrible coast from not knowing that almost anywhere at the foot of these sand-hillocks a small supply of rain-water was, as it were, stored—not for, but from, a rainy day.
Opposite to where we had halted, and only about three-quarters of a mile from the shore, lay a long, narrow islet, covered with scrub, forming a sort of natural breakwater, within which the water seemed as still and peaceful as an inland lake.
“Now, lads,” cried Ned, “there is Seal Island ; but before
WE GO SEALING.
231
we cross over we must arrange the camp and have some tucker ; after that the seals had better look out! ”
So we had some dinner, and then launched the boat, Ned and I taking an oar each, whilst Dilly sat in the bow and Johnnie in the stern. This was rather a heavy load for our frail craft, but we were sailing along steadily enough, and had done about three-quarters of the journey, when Johnnie suddenly gave a terrific yell, and, plunging forward, hit me a violent blow in the chest, which sent me sprawling head over heels into Ned’s lap. The extra weight thrown on the port side caused the boat to heel over; she began to fill, and would doubtless have sunk quickly had not Ned thrown the weight of his body on the opposite side, without, however, either getting up or making any violent movement. He shouted out, “ Keep steady! steady, all of you, or she’ll capsize! ” I picked myself up as carefully as I could, feeling much inclined to give Master Johnnie a lift under the ear, when he cried out again, “ Look, look! there’s the baste that nigh had a hold on me! ” At the same moment a huge seal lifted his head out of the water with a snort, and actually looked into the boat.
“ I’ve a very good mind to chuck you in to him,” said Ned, crossly: “we should have looked well floundering about in three fathoms of water if the boat had capsized through your stupidity.”
232
HARRY TREVERTON.
“ My word,” added Dilly, taking the cue from his master, “ you next time do-um that way, I’ll warm you! what for you too much frightened ? ”
We had certainly a narrow escape, and, in view of fresh alarms, I, for one, was by no means sorry when the boat’s keel gently grazed the fine sandy beach and we jumped ashore on the islet and dragged her after us, high and dry. The next thing was to find where the seals were, and Billy’s quick eyes were the first to discover them.
“ My word, you see-um! ” cried he in an energetic whisper. “ by-’um-bye plenty come on.” I looked where he pointed along the sandy shore, and there, sure enough, were several dark objects near the water’s edge. These were the seals, and as I looked they now and again raised themselves on their fins or flippers, making a horrible, melancholy noise, something between the cry of a human being in distress and the howl of a native dog.
“ We had better hide for a bit,” suggested Ned, also in a whisper, “till they come on shore to sun themselves, and have their midday sleep.” So we crept behind some bushes, which were what Johnnie called “ convanient,” and watched the seals as, one after the other, they swam to the shore, clumsily waddled out of the water, and laid themselves down on the dry warm sand to enjoy a doze in the sunshine.
WE GO SEALING. 233
More than once we had grasped our clubs, and we were just going to steal out on them from behind the bushes, when a belated seal would appear, and we had to restrain our impatience and wait till the last arrival had settled himself comfortably to his siesta. In the course of an hour about twenty seals were lying on the beach, the last melancholy cry had died away, and the poor brutes were sleeping as peacefully as though no murderous human beings were within a thousand miles of them.
When I thought of it afterwards, I confess to a feeling of remorse and shame, but at the moment, the slaying instinct had the upper hand of me as well as of the rest, and we crept softly from our hiding-place, advancing, club in hand, on our sleeping and defenceless prey.
The plan of attack was for Ned to go first with the gun, and pick out his seal, whilst Dilly, Johnnie, and I were each to select a victim of our own, and wait till the gun went off, when each man was to attack and kill if possible. We crept cautiously to the scene of action, dropping on our hands and knees as we approached our game. Ned rose to his feet within a yard of his seal, I did the same, raising my stick over my victim’s head. I could not help thinking how like a sleeping bulldog it looked, but there was no time for speculation or fancies; Dilly and Johnnie were standing just as I was, and we all waited the signal. Bang ! went the gun, and
234
HARRY TREVERTON.
down went my bludgeon on the seal’s head. The blow did not kill or even stun him, though I struck with all my strength. He sat up and looked at me with a sort of “ What-on-earth-are-you-about ? ” expression on his face. I should say he had never been so astonished in his life, and I tried hard to give him another little surprise by a second crack on his cranium. He was much too sharp for me, however, and, dodging my club, waddled off as fast as possible into the water. I managed to hit him a couple of thumps on his broad cushiony back; but they merely seemed to hasten his speed, and he was very soon swimming away, not at all the worse for my attack. There was nothing for it but to go and see how the others had fared. I found Ned and Dilly each triumphant over a dead seal, but Johnnie had been as unsuccessful as I had.
"What for you nothing kill-um seal?” asked Dilly, in a contemptuous tone.
“ Don’t know,” I replied. “ I’m sure I thought I’d hit him hard enough over the head to fell a bullock ! ”
“Ah, that’s just where you made the mistake ! ” said Ned. “You ought to have struck him fair and square across the nose. Just try that plan next time you get the chance. Now give us a hand to pull these chaps behind the bushes, and we must just lie by till the scare is over.”
So Ned and I got hold of a flipper each and pulled one
IT WAS TOO MUCH LIKE HITTING A MAN WHEN HE IS DOWN
JEE GO SEALING.
237
seal out of sight, whilst Johnnie and Dilly did the same with the other. I found my share of the work just as much as I could manage, the brute measuring at least five feet long, and weighing as heavy as lead.
We kept very quiet for a long time, and towards the afternoon the seals seemed to regain confidence, for they came up on the beach for another doze. We watched our opportunity, and made a more successful onslaught, when I had the satisfaction of killing my seal on the spot. I call it “ satisfaction; ” but I did not really like the sport, it was too much like hitting a man when he is down. What added to my inward scruples was the vivid recollection of how, only the day before, I had loudly complained of Dilly’s unsportsmanlike method of dealing destruction to the ducks, and here was I doing exactly the same thing to the sleeping seals 1
We only managed to kill five of them (for Johnnie missed his seal again), and by the time we had skinned them and removed the blubber it grew dark, and time to paddle back to camp. Once more our fire blazed merrily up, and we had yet another supper off roast duck. Then there was a short interval for pipes and a pleasant chat with Ned over sporting exploits before it became time to roll ourselves in our rugs, and to fall asleep to the monotonous lullaby of the “sad sea‘waves.”
CHAPTER XXII.
HARD LINES.
J NEED not give a detailed account of our return journey ; suffice it to say that although we suffered innumerable bumps and bruises, we escaped more serious injury in the shape of broken bones. On the evening of the third day after our start homeward we found ourselves once more at Running River station, where old Geordie was still keeping strict watch. He confessed, with a broad grin, to having eaten, besides his rations, sundry dainties his ‘‘old womany” had procured for him. On being further pressed about his bill of fare, he ran over a list of lizards, snakes, and rats enough to set up a museum, to say nothing of curious fungi, roots, and reptiles whose names even were unknown to us.
Next day, whilst Ned and I were hard at work cutting up the seal blubber into small pieces, preparatory to “ trying it down ” for oil, he informed me that he would be obliged to start for town at once, with the bullock-dray, to get in a fresh stock of provisions. “You see,” he explained, “I could not go to town till after the fence had been put up and our lamp oil secured. But it won’t do to lose any
238
HARD LINES.
239
more time now, or we shall be reduced to kangaroo only, of which we should very soon get sick and tired. Dilly must come with me to drive the bullocks, so you and Johnnie will be left behind, and you must just manage as best you can. You’ll have to be alone for a couple of days, as Johnnie must get a native to show him the way to the next station, twenty miles off. He will have to borrow a fortnight’s tea, sugar, and flour from the men there, and when I come back in a couple of weeks with the stores we’ll return it to them.”
This appeared to be all very plain sailing, so I contented myself with impressing upon Ned how anxious I was to get my English letters which were to be sent to my friend Summers’ care, and to whom he, Ned, was to apply for them.
Johnnie and I felt very solitary next day as we stood at the slip rail early in the afternoon, and watched the bullock-dray slowly moving off in a cloud of dust, from amidst which Dilly’s “ gees ” and “ come hithers ” sounded fainter and fainter every moment.
The dray was no sooner out of sight than Johnnie suggested that he ought to ride down the river in search of a native to act as his guide to the neighbouring station.
“ Why, where is Geordie ? ” I very naturally asked.
“ Oh, bad luck to him, he was off at daylightJ:his morning, but I expect I’ll find his camp.”
240
HARRY TRE VER TON.
So Johnnie started off on his pony, and was away for several hours, reporting on his return that he had found the camp, but not a native anywhere near it. Next morning he went up the river, and returned quite late, rather tired and disgusted, as well as starvingly hungry, for this second journey had proved equally fruitless. On the third day he crossed the river and hunted about all day without finding the least trace or track of the natives.
Matters now began to look rather serious, for our two dogs were missing, and had evidently followed Geordie to the bush in preference to remaining at the station where there was nothing for them to eat.
“Well, Johnnie,” said I, during that evening, as we sat over the fire, “we must just try and do the best we can for a while on tea and damper.”
“ Faith, and the best’ll be bad enough before long,” growled Johnnie; “for I put the last pinch o’ tay in the pot to-night; and when our damper’s done we’ll be done too, for there’s not a ha’porth of flour to make another wid ! ”
This was certainly not a cheerful prospect, for it was impossible to beg or borrow any rations unless we could get hold of a native to guide Johnnie across the bush, and we went to bed in a very depressed frame of mind.
On the fourth day Johnnie’s pony was so knocked up that he remained at home ; we did sundry little odd jobs, but
HARD LINES.
241
finished our tea and damper, and then our larder was empty. Next day we pulled up a lot of carrots and turnips that had run to seed, and tried to make some sort of dish with them, but we might as well have tried to eat chopped sticks, so we finished off all the sugar instead.
On the sixth morning I expressed a very strong opinion that something ought to be done at once, or we should starve to death.
“ All right,” said Johnnie, “ let’s do something; what’s it to be ? ”
“ Suppose we try a kangaroo hunt,” I suggested.
“Very good,” replied Johnnie, whose naturally good temper seemed about to give way under the pressure of a huge appetite and an empty larder; “ very good, I’ll get in a horse for you, and as you’re an illigant rider, maybe you can gallop one down ; but, mind you, there’s no dogs.”
This was a settler. Of course Johnnie knew right well that I was not horseman enough to gallop down a kangaroo, and that any such attempt would have been equally futile on his part. So that idea had to be abandoned, and I tried to think of something else. At last a bright idea struck me, and I shouted,
“ Let’s shoot something, Johnnie ! ”
“ All right; suppose you go after the team, and bring back the gun ; I don’t suppose it’s more nor a hundred miles off.”
1G
242	HARRY TREVERTON.
My mate was evidently in a very bad temper, but the poor lad had been in the saddle for three days on very short rations, so I made some allowance for his hunger and disappointment. Our only hope was that a native might turn . up to act as guide through the bush, and so rescue us from our plight.
On the seventh day we were both very hungry indeed, when Johnnie brightened up suddenly, and cried, “ Well, well, we have been a pair of fools ! Let’s eat the seed taters ! ”
“Well done, Johnnie!” I exclaimed. “I never thought of them ; let’s have a boiling at once ! ”
In a very short time we were enjoying a splendid meal, after which we felt much more comfortable, and in a better humour with each other. We soon found out, however, that three feeds a day on half a bag of small potatoes would not carry us very far, and on the tenth day the very smallest of them had been allowed, skins and all, like so many pills, and then we were again foodless.
1 now began to feel very weak and ill, and I could see that Johnnie was not much better. Had we been able to foresee that in future years a certain Dr. Tanner would prove to the world that body and soul could be kept together for forty days on nothing but water it might have comforted us, though I doubt whether we would have believed it. At all events, what we wanted just then was to be given three
HAND LINES.
243
square meals a day, and we could do nothing towards this desirable object except look at each other in helpless misery.
Once more I made a suggestion, but it was in a hollow voice, like a stage villain.
“Johnnie,” said I, in tragic tones, “we must kill a beast! ”
“Is it kill a baste?” cried Johnnie, as though I had proposed to slay a human being; “and howiver are you goin’ to save it without e’er a bit of salt on the primissis ? ”
The lad was rapidly turning into a perfect savage; but for that there was reason in what he said—my objection was to his manner of saying it. I walked out of the cottage, and for the hundred and fiftieth time looked up and down the flat in hopes of descrying a native. My attention was for the moment attracted by seeing a motherless calf, with a thin body and weak, staggering legs, which Johnnie had christened, inelegantly but aptly, “ Potbelly.” The animal had poked its head through the slip rails, and was staring at me in a stupid sort of way, looking the very picture of misery with its enormous stomach, high hip bones, and rough, staring coat. •
As I returned the brute’s intent gaze, my eyes did not exactly fill with tears, but my mouth began to water, and I rushed back into the cottage, where Johnnie sat dangling his legs from his stretcher bedstead, and looking the image of reckless woe.
16—2
244
HARRY TREVERTON.
“Johnnie,” whispered I, in the most dulcet and persuasive tone, “Potbelly is looking through the slip rails.”
“Yes; and what about it?” he asked, listlessly.
“Well, he doesn’t look much like butcher’s meat; still I think if he were grilled, and eaten with a little pepper and salt, he would not taste bad.”
The boy sat and stared at me with a hungry look in his eyes, so I went on, in a coaxing voice, “You see, there would not be much of him wasted, for we could easily polish him off in four days ; the master would be back by then, and if he makes any fuss about it, why, I’ll pay for him myself! ”
These last words were all that Johnnie’s conscience needed ; in an instant he was on his feet, and in another he had found and was sharpening a large butcher’s knife. I drove the poor starved calf into the stackyard and tied him up. The next question that arose was as to how to butcher the animal properly. There were many difficulties in the way of such inexperienced slaughtermen as we were, and I can only say that nothing except our ravenous hunger would have induced us to begin or continue the job, which was quite as distressing in its way to the calf as it was to us. I will draw a veil over the tragedy, for, as Johnnie truly remarked, “Faith, an’ if we’d ha’ known how to do it, ’twould ha’ been a dale aisier for him, poor baste, as well as for us.”
I am bound to confess that Johnnie and I enjoyed poor old
HAED LINES.
245
Pot very much indeed, although his flesh was somewhat stringy and difficult to chew. Our only fear was that he might not last until Ned’s return ; but on the fourteenth day, when we had nearly finished our last morsel, a cloud of dust was seen approaching, out of which we once more heard Dilly’s rather husky “ Come hithers.” I rushed towards the cart, almost frantic with excitement, shouting to Ned,
“ So glad you’re back ! we’ve been nearly starved ! We’ve eaten all the seed potatoes and poor old Potbelly, as Johnnie------” but the words died away on my lips, for, looking over Ned’s shoulder, I caught sight of a lovely smiling girl’s face, with the most beautiful blue eyes in the world, looking straight into mine with surprise and consternation. I stared as though a ghost had arisen before me, and then turned and literally fled back into the cottage.
CHAPTER XXIII.
PLACE AUX DAMES'.
whilst I darted into the house, as though to save my life, I was even then coming to the conclusion that I had made an ass of myself, and that perhaps solitude and starvation had unsettled my reason. There was no time, however, to be lost in speculating what was best to do, so I did the only thing possible at the moment, and as the bullock-cart creaked up to the door I came out of the cottage with as confident an air as I could manage, shook hands with Ned, and then brought out a stool to serve as a step for the ladies to alight from the cart.
Yes, there were two of them: an elderly lady who looked ill and sallow, who seemed about forty years old, to whom I was introduced as Mrs. John Reeves, Ned’s sister-in-law; and then Ned added, “This is my niece. Miss Lilian Reeves.”
My courage lasted whilst I shook hands with the elderly lady, but it oozed away rapidly as I went through the same ceremony with the younger. But she said, “ Flow do you do, Mr. Treverton?” in such a sweet soft voice, and smiled so frankly and pleasantly on me, that I congratulated 246
PLACE ACE DAMES!
247
myself that I had not been able to run away from her altogether.
As soon as the two ladies had entered the cottage, Ned, with the rather feeble assistance of Johnnie and me, managed to unload the dray. There were many extra boxes and packages belonging to our new inmates, and my weakness made the job a long one. At last, however, I was rewarded by Ned’s handing me an English letter. I can hardly hope to make the stay-at-home reader understand with what emotion I sought a solitary spot in which to open and read—nay, rather devour—the contents of my letter. The dear handwriting, the deep interest I felt in every little scrap of home news, the rapture of reading assurances of the love borne me by my people, all filled my heart with a wave of tenderness. I read, in my mother’s writing, that she prayed daily that I might be kept from all harm, and helped to work manfully and honestly in my new life.
As I re-entered the cottage I met Ned, who kindly expressed a hope that I had received satisfactory news. I answered him with a sort of dimness stealing over my sight, and a sudden lump in my throat, but for many a day after that I felt brighter and stronger and happier, and more determined to deserve the love and approval of those who were dearer to me than I knew until I had left them.
248
JIARRY TREVERTON.
“ I suppose you were rather astonished to see a girl looking over my shoulder just now, in the dray?” said Ned with a smile.
“Yes, I was indeed, to say nothing of being confounded and frightened when I found out that a young lady had heard what I said about the seed potatoes and that wretched Pot. She must have thought me a bit mad. Oh, by-the-bye, Ned, about that calf: I told Johnnie that if there was anything to pay for him I would be responsible.” ■
Ned laughed pleasantly, and said that I had paid quite dearly enough already by having to eat such horrid stuff.
“Do the ladies intend to remain here long?” I asked.
“Yes,” he answered; “my sister-in-law is out of health, and no wonder. She fancies she has every ailment under the sun by turn, and the worst of it is she takes all sorts of remedies for these ailments. It’s the quack medicines which are killing her, and I’ve just brought her up here to give her a chance of getting well, away from her quacks and quack physic. We don’t grow those sort of gentry in the bush, you know, so I’m sure she’ll get all right in no time.”
I longed to ask something about the fair Lilian, but shyness and—shall I confess it ?—hunger restrained me.
PLACE AUX EAMES!
249
I was more anxious to have a private meal off damper than to see any young lady, no matter how pretty. I confided my thoughts to Ned, who understood me well enough to go into the cottage and fetch me out a huge lump of damper, with which I just took the rough edge off my ferocious appetite before joining the others at supper.
In the course of a few days our domestic arrangements had certainly improved. Ned and I of course gave up the cottage to the ladies, and built ourselves a little bush hut to sleep in. The pleasure of joining them at meals was enhanced by the improved comfort of everything; the nice clean tablecloth, the pretty new cups and saucers instead of our pannikins, and the bright spoons and forks which replaced our rusty steel prongs. Much of this polishing and cleaning fell to Johnnie’s lot, and he used sometimes to growl at it.
“A dale o’ trouble, and all to no good; it’s ‘Johnnie’ here, and ‘Johnnie’ there, and ‘Plaize to do this,’ and ‘ Plaize to do that,’ till I wish I was out again after the cattle.”
“But we are much more comfortable now, Johnnie,” I argued, “and I am sure We live much better.”
“ The living’s right enough,” growled he, “ but you could eat your tucker just as well without them table-cloths and things; and what’s the good of them bits of scrub and stuff
25°
NARRY TREVERTON.
the young ’un puts on the table when you’re aitin’ yer vittels ? people don’t want to ait scrub ! ”
This was an allusion to poor Lilian’s attempts at table decoration, formed of leaves and boughs of various sorts and shades of green. I thought the little centre-piece looked charming, but it was quite thrown away upon Johnnie, whose fixed idea was that nothing should be put on a table which could not be eaten.
Yes, the “living,” as Johnnie called it, was certainly much better, for Ned had brought in a couple of cows, which gave us lots of milk, and even butter. Some cocks and hens had also been among the contents of the dray; and we often had fresh eggs, besides an occasional pudding or some other simple delicacy made by the skilful hands of pretty Lilian Reeves.
“ Oh, she’s pretty, is she ? ” I hear someone ask.
Yes, Lily (I may as well call her Lily at once) was undeniably pretty. The most casual glance showed you a slim graceful figure, “just as high as a man’s heart,” (as a modern playwright puts it), nice, delicate features, a blooming skin, telling of youth and health and activity, and eyes of the rare deep violet-blue that poets rave of. Is it any wonder that I thought her then, and I think her now, the most charming and lovely creature I ever beheld ? (Yes, ma’am, it’s quite true, every word of it.)
PLACE ACX DAMES! 251
Of course I admired her very much from the first moment I beheld her, and I enjoyed her society when she was in a gay humour, and did not tease me too much by either laughing at me or putting on an injured air at my stupidity.
The old lady did not trouble herself much about any one; probably she was more seriously engaged in studying the development of some imaginary symptoms, and the best method of curing them. Ned was more observant, however, although I do not think he felt very anxious about the boy-and-girl friendship which was evidently springing up between his niece and myself.
“ Is this your first attack of calf-love, Harry ? ” he asked, suddenly, one day when we were walking together.
I felt very indignant at this rough question, and answered, coldly, that I neither knew nor wished to know what calflove meant.
“ Perhaps not,” he replied, “ but you’ll have to go through with it some day, for it is as sure to attack you as did the measles when you were a baby. All young men have it; and I don’t mind telling you that when I was your age I had rather a sharp bout of it myself.”
What Ned meant for a friendly hint hidden under the guise of chaff, only made me more shy and reserved towards him than I should naturally have been. But the
252
HAU Ji Y TREVERTON.
day was not far distant when I suffered from the disease in its most aggravated form, and I don’t know whether keeping my feelings so closely concealed did not add to my sufferings, which were very real and acute in spite of the unromantic name by which Ned called them.
CHAPTER XXIV.
FIRST LOVE.
^S days and weeks went by, Lily Reeves and I became very good friends. Of course I had made up my mind that there must be no stronger feeling than friendship between us, as in the first place I only owned about ten pounds in the world, and my position forbade anything more than an ordinary interest in my employer’s niece.
It was very easy to make these good resolutions, but quite a different matter to carry them out, as I very soon found to my cost when I discovered that my heart was gone, and with it my peace of mind, and my healthy, boyish enjoyment of the passing moment. I have not an idea how it came about, and can honestly declare it was in spite of myself. But how could it be otherwise ! Our simple pastoral life threw us often together, and often alone. We might have been Paul and Virginia in their tropic island, or, indeed, Adam and Eve in the first garden, for all the social restrictions we met with, and before I knew that I was even on thej verge of the cliff, lo! I had tumbled over the precipice, and was many fathoms deep 253
254
JIA RR Y TREVERTON.
in love with the bluest eyes and sweetest voice in all the wide world.
This was all very well and very pleasant, but the question immediately rose up before me, What should I do ? If I told Ned he would only laugh, and drive me half mad by talking about calf-love ; that was supposing he did not take, as he well might, the matter more seriously, and ask me if I thought I was justified in saying a word to anyone on the subject when I was earning just a labourer’s wages and nothing more. I felt that in spite of my claim to be a gentleman I should be in reality acting like an unprincipled fool if I forgot my real position and dared to confess my love. No, I could not speak to Ned.
And Lily! did she love me ? I thought so, and was even mad enough to hope she did. Should I tell her of my devotion, and how ready I felt to lay down my life to prove it? No, that did not seem honourable either, and I retained sufficient sense and command over myself to feel the bathos involved in professions, however genuine, of willingness to die for the beloved object. Sometimes I felt that if I were to tell the truth, that I, a friendless, homeless, penniless pauper, loved her, she might let her sweet thoughts pity me, but to such dangerous pity I well knew I had no right or claim. There seemed but one
answer to my ceaseless self-questioning, and it is obvious
FUiST TO KE.
255
what it was when conscience asked and honour answered.
“ Go away. Pack up your swag (your worldly possessions will fit into it quite easily), shake hands calmly with the girl you love, and go out once more into the wilderness like the vagrant you are. Leave the bright blue eyes and sweet voice far behind, to be thought of only as joys too precious for the gentleman-pauper.”
Yes, that was what I ought to do, no doubt about it; but day after day passed, and still I delayed to carry out the sentence of banishment pronounced by my reason and sense of duty. I kept saying meekly to myself, “ It will break my heart! ” “ Well, let it break,” the sterner self answered; and then I thought, in a feeble sort of way, that after all I ought to give Lily some hint of my heroic (!) resolution before carrying it out.
Perhaps I did not seek an opportunity very eagerly, for it was some little time longer before Mrs. Reeves made one by suddenly sitting down on a fallen tree during one of our evening rambles, and, declaring herself fatigued, bade Lily and me continue our walk a little farther.
So we strolled on, silently at first, whilst I tried to frame a sentence which would tell my sweet companion that I had made up my mind to leave the station. I wonder now if I ever should have taken courage to speak, though it
25$
HARRY TREVERTON.
was not so much courage I lacked as the power to speak at all, so fast did my heart beat and so dry and parched were my lips. Presently she gave me the opportunity at once dreaded and desired, by saying in her soft, sympathetic voice,
“ Do you know, Mr. Treverton, I suspect you have been feeling quite unwell lately.”
“ Why do you think so ? ” I asked hoarsely.
“ Because you are not nearly so bright and cheery as you used to be when we first came,” she said innocently.
“No, Miss Reeves, I am not so bright and cheery naturally, for I am very unhappy. How could it be otherwise when I am thinking of leaving you ? ”
There, I had done it at last, and the effect I produced certainly startled my poor Lily as much as I could selfishly have desired. She stood quite still and turned very pale, but after a second’s pause walked slowly on, turning her head slightly away, and saying, in an unsteady voice, which she vainly tried to make as cold and calm as possible, “ And do you think going away will make you happier ? ”
“ No 1 ” I almost shouted; and I felt no difficulty in speaking now. “ How can it ? I shall be a great deal more wretched, for I shall be homeless, friendless, and almost penniless.”
“Yes, I know you are poor,” said my Lily, more calmly,
FIRST LOVE.
257
as I became more vehement, “ but you are a gentleman, and have a brave heart. Why should you go away to be miserable among strangers? Does Uncle Ned know that you are thinking of leaving him ? ”
“No, not yet; but I am sure he would think me quite right to do so. Gladly I would stay if I could.”
“We shall be very sorry to lose you,” said Lily; and commonplace as the words were, they evoked I know not what feelings of satisfaction, for with all her self-command, my love had not been able to keep a certain vibrating tone of tender regret out of her gentle voice.
This impelled me to say, (Oh, yes, I know quite well I ought not to have asked any such question, but we are not always wise and prudent, even at nineteen years of age) “ Shall I stay, Lily ? ”
Simple as was the question, my calling her by her pretty home-name for the first time gave it its true significance, and with a little girlish alarm she turned homeward, saying, in trembling tones,
“Oh, you must not ask me! Do what you think right.”
So we rejoined Mrs. Reeves in silence, and yet I felt ever so much happier, for a true lover’s instinct told me that Lily would feel as I selfishly wished her to feel when the day of parting came; and every man who has loved
17
25s
HARRY TREVERTON.
will know that this certainly afforded me the only satisfaction I was capable of feeling.
The quiet yet busy days succeeded each other. My resolution to go away remained unchanged, and I went through all the balancing bliss and misery peculiar to my “head-over-ears” condition. Sometimes I built airy and absurd castles of good luck coming down the chimney, so to speak, and of Lily and me walking hand-in-hand through the flowery paradise into which a lover’s eyes turns this world of weeds and tares. Then, again, all was blackest despair—I was a banished, solitary wanderer, and Lily another man’s wife! That was always the last turn of the screw; and as I contrived to convey some inkling to poor little Lily of my despairing state of mind, it is no wonder she grew anxious and unhappy too, arj3t lost her merry ways and blooming colour.
Mrs. Reeves never thought anyone except herself could ever have a finger ache, and she did not notice that Lily’s eyes grew larger and her sweet face paler, but Ned was more observant, and one fine day he said,
“ Look here, Lily! I’m going to have Gipsy brought in, and you must go for a ride whenever Harry can spare time to take you. I’m sure you don’t take exercise enough. You are not looking half so well as when you came here, and I daresay you miss your rides. I ought to have thought of that sooner.’
ELEST love.
259
So Gipsy was driven in and roughly groomed by Dilly’s willing hands. I would not let anyone but myself fasten the saddle securely on the mare’s back; Ned swung his pretty niece lightly to her seat, and I mounted one of the station hacks, and forth we rode the very next afternoon. Lily rode beautifully, and never looked better than in her saddle, but this evening she seemed to me to be riding recklessly and carelessly. We galloped through the bush in break-neck style, jumping logs, dodging traps in the shape of old sawpits, and I began to feel almost provoked at the speed with which we were flying along the narrow track—Lily in front— which precluded conversation as effectually as if we were miles instead of yards asunder. Still it was a glorious gallop, the lights and shades, shimmering among the big Australian forest trees, the delicious air through which we raced, and above all the slight figure in front of me, looking the personification of health and courage and graceful girlish beauty.
The exercise soon brought back colour to her cheeks and brightness to her eyes, and when we paused to breathe the horses she spoke more like her old self in gay times, of the exceeding beauty of the afternoon, and pointed out the lakelike stretches of river, of which we caught a glimpse from time to time, as the rays of the westering sun touched their smooth surface and made paths of ruddy glory, hardly per-17—2
260
HARR Y TRE VERTON.
ceived before they were shut out by tall trees from our dazzled sight.
On again, faster than ever. I began to feel angry and amazed at this reckless riding, which compelled me to keep my old hack at his best pace not to lose sight of the flying damsel so far ahead in the narrow track. I was trying to lessen the distance between us in order to remonstrate against tearing through such thick bush at this insane speed, when I suddenly missed the pretty, upright figure before me, and saw instead through the dust a confused vision of horse and habit and girl rolling on the ground. I can never forget the horror of that moment. I believe I shrieked like a woman, whilst the few seconds it took me to reach the spot held more of dread and anguish in their brief passage than I should have thought could have been crowded into a lifetime.
Was she dead! No! thank the Merciful God, she moves! I was off my horse and leaning over her in an instant, scarcely able to ask if she was hurt. She was lying on her right side, and, as far as I could see, appeared at least unbruised, but her legs were firmly pinned to the ground by the weight of the horse’s body, and his fore and hind feet were in dangerous proximity on either side of her precious head.
“ I don’t think I am much hurt,” she whispered, “ but I cannot move, and if the mare attempts to rise she must kick
HORSE AND GIRL ROLLING ON THE GROUND.
FIX ST TOFF.
263
me. Can you take hold of her front legs and quietly turn her on her back ? ”
It will be seen that Lily took the lead, shaken and terrified as she must have been, poor darling, and gave directions as to what was to be done. But it must be remembered in excuse for my ignorance that I had “assisted,” as the French say, at very few accidents on horseback, and at none where a woman was concerned. I did not, therefore, question the wisdom of her suggestions, but carried them out promptly and carefully. I let my own horse go, feeling sure he was too thoroughly blown to stir from the spot, and crept on tiptoe up to the mare, who was fortunately too much stuuned by her fall to think of getting up just yet. I took firm hold of her front legs, and, with all my strength, levered her as far on to her back as the saddle would allow. The moment the pressure was removed Lily scrambled and rolled clear of her, not quite in the usual graceful and composed fashion of heroines in difficulties, it is true, but still out of range of the marc’s legs, and then she got up and staggered to the foot of a tree, where she was fain to sink down again.
It was too much happiness to see that Lily could move at all, and I let the mare’s fore legs fall, and darted to my darling’s side. Before I had reached it, however, the mare had begun to plunge and struggle to get up, and it made me sick to see where her hoofs went, and how horrible must have
264
HARRY TREVERTON.
been my Lily’s fate had her horse attempted to rise before I could help her.
My next care was to secure the horses, for we were far from home, and one of us, at least, quite unfit to walk the many miles back to it. Indeed, I was trembling quite as much as Lily when I came up to her at last, with a horse’s bridle over each arm, and asked her how she felt. She could only smile faintly, poor child, and she looked so white and wan that I hastened to tie the horses’ reins to a branch, and making a sort of rough cup out of the fragments of paper bark lying around, hastened to the river bank and brought back a little water. This I did two or three times, carrying it more steadily each journey, and at last she seemed to revive; and after assuring me that she felt no pain, except from a severe bruise on her arm, we remounted and rode slowly home through the fast-gathering twilight. Darkness soon fell, but the track was plain and the stars shone brightly. We could not go fast, partly because the horses were so blown, and partly because Lily’s arm hurt her very much, so we made but slow progress.
Presently we heard a horse galloping towards us, and this proved to be Ned, who had ridden out in much alarm to look for us. He only stayed to satisfy himself that Lily was safe, and to hear from her that she thought the accident must have been caused by her mare catching her hoof in
FLRST LOVE.
265
a rope-like root across the track, and then he turned and rode home rapidly to relieve Mrs. Reeves from her great dread and anxiety.
So we paced slowly and silently homeward ; our hearts were too full for speech, but when we reached the slip rail, and before I stooped from my saddle to remove it, Lily suddenly said, in a very unsteady voice,
“ I can’t go in, Harry, without saying how grateful I am to you for saving my life. How can I ever thank you enough ? ”
When I look back on that moment I am astonished at my own audacity, and yet at the time my answer to this question, asked in the trembling tones of the girl I loved, and when the near approach of a horrible death for her seemed to have swept away all social barriers, appeared the only possible one.
Our horses were close together, and I just flung my arm round her waist, drew her slight form to me, and gave her a good, honest kiss, which told its own story, if ever kiss did ? Lily seemed to think my answer as natural and inevitable as I did, and we neither of us said a word. I let down the slip rail, and we rode up to the house. Ned was waiting, and I saw him lift Lily out of the saddle, and I heard Mrs. Reeves burst out into eager questioning about the accident. But it was in a dream,
266 HARRY TREVERTON.
and “ Love’s young dream,” too, if ever such a thing existed, that I led the horses away, and helped Dilly to take off and house the saddles, and so forth, for I had given my love a kiss, and she had not rebuked me! I envied no man on earth at that moment—no, not a king on his throne.
^SLVO LWAW Dr w.>
CHAPTER XXV.
“GOOD-BYE, SWEETHEART, GOOD-BYE.”
'T'HAT incident by starlight had the effect of considerably modifying my ideas about going away. In my fits of depression I used to fancy the love must be all on my side, but now I could not doubt that Lilian would dislike my leaving Running River as much as I should.
A number of excellent arguments for remaining at once presented themselves, the most persistent of which was the question, “If she cares for me, why should I make her miserable by going away?” Yes, it was surely much wiser and fairer for her to stay on, and why should we not both be happy ? Of course, there could be no question of marriage at present, but we were young and quite content with the present, and willing to trust the future.
Having reached this point, I gave myself up to the enjoyment of the moment. It is true I saw very little of Lily, and seldom alone, but at our age we were content with crumbs of happiness, and it was enough for us to be together at meals, and any stray opportunities were made the most of. Alas! it was one of these blissful chances which led to my banishment, as will be shown.
2G7
268
IMRRY TRE PER TON.
Late one afternoon, just before supper, when Lily and I had walked, as was our custom, down to the slip rail to wait for Ned’s return from cattle hunting, the little fairy took advantage of her mother’s strolling apart to make the dangerous remark, “ I thought you were going to leave us, Harry?”
The question, asked in a coaxing tone and with a bewildering glance from love-softened eyes, was quite enough to upset my boyish prudence, so I only came a little closer to her and whispered,
“Yes, I had quite made up my mind to go away, but lately, whenever I come near these slip rails, specially by starlight, my resolution always fails me, somehow.”
Lily was evidently in a very naughty teasing mood, for she looked as grave as a judge, and said, coldly,
“Is it because you were so very rude that evening? You must behave better in future, or I shall not like you a bit.”
“That is very hard on me, Lily,” I replied dolefully, feeling suddenly cast down from my mountain-top of certainty and bliss, “when I am so fond of you. Perhaps I had really better go away.”
“What a silly boy you are to be always bothering about going away! ” she cried, pettishly, and turning her shoulder to me.
“GOOD-DYE, SWEETHEART, GOOD-RYE.” 269
“Am I? Then I won’t be silly any more!” and by way of sealing my resolve I turned Lily round towards me and gave her another kiss. It was my only chance, and just in time, for Ned cantered up at that moment, and had it not been for the friendly duskiness must have beheld this little Arcadian interlude. As it was, however, Mrs. Reeves had joined us again by the time he reached the slip rail, and we all returned to the house together.
That night, whilst I was lying in my hut, gazing into the depth of blue, starlit sky, visible through my rude doorway, and feeling supremely happy, Dilly suddenly entered, and at once squatted, native fashion, near the door, with a broad grin on his face.
“ What do you want ? ” I asked, rather sharply, for it was vexatious to be roused from my delicious reverie.
“ My word! ” said Dilly, looking hard at me, and grinning, if possible, more widely.
I did not much like the peculiar tone of Dilly’s “ My word.” He was evidently very full of something. What could it be?
“Well, what is it?” I asked at last, quite savagely.
Dilly only said “ My word! ” again, but this time he followed his exclamation by a loud mocking laugh.
I sat up and looked at the lad. As I have said, he had a pleasant face, and the row of teeth he now displayed
270
HARRY TRE FER TON.
were simply perfect, but as I looked at him it struck me that his expression was dangerous and even hideous.
“ What are you laughing at, and why don’t you speak ? ” I asked, but in a more conciliatory tone.
“I nothing tell-um you!” he replied saucily, “I must tell-um Ned! ” and again he went off into a fresh fit of laughter.
“You are a fool, Dilly,” I remarked, with an air of indifference I was far from feeling.
This had the effect of checking his mirth, and he began to explain himself.
“Me nothing fool,” he declared wagging his head, as if he knew more than he chose to reveal. After a pause he said, “You know long time ago me and you gallop-um home and kill-um emu ? ”
“Yes, I remember.”
“ I ask-um you,” continued Dilly, holding up his finger as though he were speaking to a naughty child, “ I ask-um you nothing tell-um Ned. I say, ‘Please Harry, you nothing tell-um Ned.’ ”
“Yes, you asked me not to tell,” I admitted.
“And you did tell-um, and Ned big-fellow-sulky me.”
“ Well, go on,” I cried, beginning to feel very uncomfortable, I hardly knew why.
“Now me must tell-um Ned!” he shouted in a tone of
savage triumph. “Me must tell-um Ned!”
“GOOD-BYE, SWEETHEART, GOOD-BYE.”
271
“ And what are you going to tell ? ” I asked, as coolly as I could, but feeling thankful that the dim light hid my tell-tale face.
The native raised himself slowly from the place where he had been squatting, and standing upright as a dart, looked at me for a moment, with a cruel and malignant composure. His hour of revenge had arrived, and he was bent on enjoying it to the utmost. With painful interest I watched his every movement, as, bending slightly to one side, he stretched out his arm, and then curved it, as though drawing some imaginary object towards him. This was quite bad enough, and I felt positively sick as I watched him, but when, after an instant’s pause, there followed a smack of his lips, more like a pistol-shot than anything else, I felt as if I could have felled him to the earth.
There was not the slightest doubt now (and it seemed as if I had always known it) what the young ruffian meant; he had evidently been watching Lily and me as we stood by the slip rail that evening, and this too-ex-pressive pantomime was the result of his spying. Maddened by anger, I seized a heavy boot and flung it at Master Dilly’s head; but I might just as well have saved myself the trouble, for he dodged it with the greatest ease, and marched off into the darkness with another derisive shout of laughter.
272
HARRY TREVERTON.
It was not very pleasant to think over the position I had placed myself in by my own imprudence, but far worse was it to realise that I had also compromised my poor Lily. Of course Dilly would tell Ned what he had seen, and all my own arguments in favour of open and honest dealing, and against the blackness of deceit, which I had found eloquent and convincing when launched against the poor savage on the subject of our having galloped down the emu, seemed to tumble down on my own head in a perfect avalanche of fine moral sentiment.
And had I not been deceitful ? Alas! the answer was obvious, and such deceit was worse in my case than in Dilly’s, for I knew better.
There was not much sleep for me that night, and it was with a very hang-dog air that I went about my work ; but not until quite the afternoon did Ned ask me to come down the river with him and cut some saplings. In spite of his easy manner, my guilty conscience made me uncommonly uncomfortable as we sallied forth; nor was I much relieved (though anything seemed better than the state of tension my nerves had been in since Dilly’s visit) when Ned said, in a very unconcerned voice,
“So you and Lily have been doing a little billing and cooing, have you ? ”
The question was so unexpected, and his manner so
“GOOD-BYE, SWEETHEART, GOOD-BYE.”
273
matter-of-fact, that for the moment I could not answer him a word; but as he walked on, glancing at me with an indulgent air of inquiry, I at last managed to stammer out,
“I am afraid I have allowed my feelings to carry me away; but Miss Reeves is quite blameless, I assure you, and it is only I who have been indiscreet.”
“Well,” said Ned, with the same air of good-humoured forbearance, “ I don’t know that either of you have been so very much to blame. No doubt your intentions are perfectly honourable, and you will of course at once ask Mrs. Reeves for her daughter’s hand.”
I looked at Ned in mute astonishment, and wondered how he could say such serious things with so unmoved a countenance. As he seemed to expect me to answer him, I said, mournfully,
“ I only wish, with all my heart, that I could do so; but you know as well as I do that I am not in a position to marry. How could I speak to Mrs. Reeves?”
“Well, I don’t see that,” went on my tormentor, as if he were discussing a reasonable matter; “ I think you’ll have about five pounds to the good at the end of this month. That would buy pots and pans. I’ll build you a hut and give you a pig for a wedding present—and, mind you, a pig is a very useful present for a married man. You 18
274
HARRY TRE VER TOW.
wouldn’t want much furniture; there are lots of logs about for seats, and heaps of rushes for beds.”
Ned had to pause here for breath, and I managed to gasp out,
“Oh, Ned, please don’t talk like that.”
“Oh, but I must talk about your future plans,” said Ned, starting off at score once more, “ specially as they affect my niece. If you are not prepared to marry the young lady, I really think the only honourable course is for you to leave the station at once.”
“Very well,” I said ; “of course I knew that was what you were coming to. You are quite right from your own point of view, and I daresay it is best for her. We had better turn back at once, and I’ll put up my things, and say good-bye.”
I returned alone, for Ned kept on his path; and no convict sentenced to transportation ever moved and spake and ate with a heavier heart than mine was that fatal afternoon. I went straight to my hut, and busied myself in collecting my few possessions, all of the barest necessaries. In about an hour or so Ned came into the hut with a couple of slips of paper in his hand. One was an account of what had been supplied to me in the way of boots and rough clothing, and the other a cheque for the balance of pay due to me—just as he had said, about five pounds.
“GOOD-EYE, SWEETHEART, GOOD-EYE.”
275
I took both from his hand, and then asked,
“Am I to go now?”
“No, no, not till to-morrow,” cried Ned, good-natured to the last. “You’d better say good-bye to the ladies to-night, and you may tell Lily it is for both your sakes, and, as your truest friend, that I insist on this separation.”
He placed his hand kindly on my shoulder as he spoke, and I very nearly broke down, but managed to thank him for all his kindness, and to ask his pardon for my indiscretion. His only answer was a warm pressure of my hand; and then he walked quickly away.
After tea I had an opportunity ot saying “ good-bye ” to Lily alone. There was no time to prepare her for my tidings, and I told her bluntly that Ned had discharged me, and that I was leaving at daylight.
“ Discharged you ! ” said the girl, indignantly; “ and what for ? ”
“Because he has found out how much I love you, Lily, and thinks it will be better for both our sakes that I should go.”
She stood quite still for a moment; and then, placing her hand |u’Mietly in mine, said,
“Yes, lias better; but I shall miss you very much.”
“ Give me one more word before we part, my darling,” I whispered. And then, as she laid her sweet face against 18—2
276
HARRY TRE YER TON.
mine, I murmured, “I shall never forget you, and always try to be worthy of you, even if I never see you again. Good-bye, sweetheart; good-bye I ” and I took my kiss and a hand-clasp besides, and turned away without going into the house again.
CHAPTER XXVI.
BANISHMENT.
pOR several hours after I had wished Lily good-bye I rambled about the enclosure in an aimless sort of way, wondering how I should shape my course and what I ought to do.
It was bad enough to have to start again as a common tramp, but what I felt more than anything was the possibility that poor Lily might soon realize how foolish she had been to care anything about a poor homeless vagabond.
When I entered our little hut Ned had already rolled himself in his blankets, but was evidently waiting for me to come to bed, as in a very wide-awake voice he asked me if I had wished the ladies good-bye. I told him yes, and that I was ready to start.
“ And where do you think of going to, Harry ? ” he asked with kindly interest. “If you like, I will give you a letter to my brother explaining things, and I’m sure he’ll be glad to have you back again.”
I declined this offer, however, saying I should prefer to take my chance of something turning up on my journey.
“Well, I’m very sorry matters have turned out so awk-
277
278
//AW Y TRE TER TON.
wardly,” said Ned, “but there is no help for it now, is there ? I have had two of the horses kept in, and tomorrow Johnnie will ride with you as far as Tea-tree Swamp, and then bring your horse back. This will save you thirty miles’ walk, and put you on a good road.”
I thanked Ned for his kindness, and for the last time I threw myself on my rude bed, but neither sleep nor pleasant dreams were my portion that night, for was I not on the point of banishment from my garden of Eden ?— and. worst of all, my Eve was to be left behind me!
As soon as it was light enough to see the track we were mounted and starting, Ned having himself seen to some breakfast for me, and wished me the kindliest good-bye. We rode through the slip rails, and I marked the exact spot where I had stolen that first sweet kiss, and I could not help a backward glance at the still and silent cottage where my love slumbered yet. A turn of the track soon hid it from my sight, and so I rode away wondering whether I should ever see my dear bright Lily again on this earth.
After travelling all day, silently enough, we reached the dismal Tea-tree Swamp, its loneliness intensified by the croaking of swarms of bull-frogs, varied by the occasional and distant howl of a wild-dog. However, tired horsemen cannot afford to be particular, so we hobbled our horses,
BANISHMENT.
279
made a capital fire, and, having eaten some supper, turned in for the night in the old camp fashion.
Very early next morning Johnnie wished me a friendly good-bye and started for home. How I envied him! But it was worse than useless to pine for joys left far behind. What I had now to do was to look out for a future chance of earning a decent livelihood. I dismissed the idea, suggested by Ned, of returning to George Reeves, for I feared to trespass too much on his kindness, but it was with a very heavy heart, I can tell you, that I looked at the one road branching off towards Sandtown, and which would have led me past Reeves’ station, and decided to take the other leading to a sparsely settled district. As I sat thinking matters over, a team, driven by a white man accompanied by a native, drew up at the Swamp, and, having unharnessed and hobbled out their horses, walked up to my fire.
“ Good morning, mate,” said the man, cheerily. “ I think we’ll boil our pannikins at your fire, if you don’t mind.”
“Do so, by all means,” I replied, glad to have someone to speak to in that desolate place. “ Sit down while I gather some more wood.”
So I made up the fire, whilst the teamster had a wash, and his native filled up the pannikins from the swamp, and then we had breakfast together. The stranger was a good-
2 So
HARRY TRE EER TOM
looking man of middle age, and had the appearance of a respectable farmer.
“Are you looking for a job, mate?” he asked, as we sipped our hot tea.
“Yes, I would be glad of respectable employment, if I could find anything that suited me,” 1 said.
“What do you say to a job of shepherding—wages two pounds a month, and rations? I give fourteen pounds of flour, two pounds of sugar, and a quarter of a pound of tea per week, with as much kangaroo or emu as you can eat. I can’t afford mutton just yet awhile, as I want my little flock to increase."
“ I’d be glad to accept your offer if I knew anything about sheep,” I replied, “ but the fact is I’ve had no experience at all about them as yet.”
“ Well, you see, you don't want much experience for a small flock of seven hundred. You can have a native to show you about the bush, and there'll always be plenty of them to catch game for you whilst you have a couple of kangaroo dogs at the camp.”
“Very well, sir, I can but try, and I’ll do my best for you ; ” and once more I had a master.
He was not exactly the sort of man I should have selected as my employer, but the dread of a long tramp with a swag on my back decided me to accept the offer
BANISHMENT.
281
that had been made. So when I started again, the same afternoon, my bundle was on the cart, and I was tramping along by the team.
Our stage was only fifteen miles, and before we had reached the homestead my new employer had told me that his name was Wilcox, and that he was a bachelor, and that I should not live with him, as the sheep-station was a dozen miles or more from the farm. I don’t think I should have dignified Mr. Wilcox’s place with the name of a farm, consisting, as it did, of only a large rush hut, a couple of stock-yards, and some cleared ground. A few lean pigs rambled about, and some fowls seemed as much at home within the hut as outside it. An old man (called Jerry, I afterwards found) seemed to be the only person about the place, and he lent a willing hand to take out the horses, unload the cart, and prepare tea for us. He was rewarded for his activity with a bottle of brandy by his master. This did not improve matters, and the old wretch lost no time in passing through the various stages of intoxication, until he became so helplessly drunk that Wilcox ordered him to “go and lie down,” just as he would have spoken to a troublesome dog! As he had several times nearly lurched into the large fire blazing cheerfully outside the hut, his compliance with this order probably saved his life.
That night I rolled myself in my blanket near the native’s
282
HARRY TREVERTON.
fire, preferring the company of a respectable “black fellow” to that of a drunken European, and I think I need hardly add that, before I fell asleep, I had fully realised that I had taken service with a very “ rough lot ” indeed.
On the following morning Wilcox and I breakfasted together, whilst old Jerry staggered about, as drunk as ever; and no wonder, for it turned out he had finished the whole bottle of brandy !
I need not here repeat the detailed instructions which Wilcox gave me as to how I was to carry out my duties as his shepherd. They appeared very simple, and there could be no possibility of my losing myself in the bush. Although the prospect of such utter solitude did not appear veiy cheerful, it still seemed preferable to a life at “the farm,” and I felt really thankful when the native lad, Sam, and I mounted our horses and rode out into the sand-plains, en route for the sheep camp.
A four hours’ ride brought us to a place with the queer native name of Yeny-mingat, where we found a large number of natives, who received us with a hearty welcome. One black fellow, dressed in a very ragged shirt and trousers, was introduced to me as the shepherd whose flock I was to take charge of. This worthy, who seemed very proud of his superiority in garb to his kangaroo-skin-clothed brethren, shook hands with me in true European fashion. I looked
BANISHMENT.
283
about for the station, as Wilcox had always grandly called it but could see nothing in the shape of a hut. This native, however, took me to a small beehive structure, in front of which lay a sack with some flour, and another bundle with tea and sugar. Near these provisions for my support lay a very dirty and battered frying-pan, an equally worn-out kettle, a couple of pannikins, likewise an old tin plate, knife and fork, and spoon. This, then, was to be my home, and these my home comforts, for some months to come! Nor would I have any associates but the black fellows, whose language I could very imperfectly make out, whilst I was equally unintelligible to them.
About a hundred yards off a small flock of sheep were lying up under the shade of some trees, and as we approached them a beautiful black-and-tan collie came bounding towards us with a bark of welcome.
“ Hullo, Laddie ! You see-um—your new master! ” said Sam, pointing to me.
I patted my new friend on the hca^l; and he placed his fore-paws on my breast, looked earneearnePt° my face, and wagged his feathery tail as though satisfied with his inspection. Poor Laddie! many a sad and weary day we spent together after that first introduction; but I had yet another friend to make.
As I was unpacking my swag, and trying to put things
284
SIA7?AY TAEVERTOJV.
in order inside my future residence, a tall, upright old man, about sixty years of age, walked up to the hut and looked earnestly at me. He was a fine specimen of a native, well set-up and muscular, with long dark hair floating on his shoulders in singular contrast to a snow-white beard. But what struck me most was the extraordinary brilliancy of his eyes; as he gazed earnestly on me their glance seemed literally to pierce me through and through. Foi' a few moments the old fellow thus regarded me in silence; and then, turning round to where Sam was busy with his horse, he began talking loudly to him, using vehement gesticulations.
“ What is the matter with the old chap, Sam ? ” I asked.
Sam looked rather sheepish and would not answer my question.
“ Is he sulky ? Does he want me to go away ? ” I asked again.
“ No, he nothing sulky,” answered Sam, rather reluctantly ; “ he wants you?’
“ What can he want me for ? ” I wondered; but I walked out of the hut and stood before him, with the idea in my mind that he was a little mad. I looked appealingly at Sam, who stood grinning, hard by, but would not say a word to relieve my anxiety. So there we stood face to face, and as the old native looked into my eyes, his gaze
SUDDENLY HE FLUNG HIS STRONG ARMS RIGHT ROUND MY BODY.
BANISHMENT.
287
became so intense that I felt glued to the spot as though he were mesmerising me. Suddenly he made a stride forwards, flung his strong arms right round my body, and held me tightly to his breast. This would hardly have been an agreeable surprise in any case, but an embrace from a native is very trying in more senses than one.
For a moment I felt real alarm, and called to Sam to know what it meant, but that worthy merely laughed. I was perfectly helpless, with my arms pinioned by the old man’s embrace, and there was nothing for it but to let matters take their course.
Presently the old savage loosened his hold, and held me from him at arm's length, still gazing fixedly at me, but now I saw that tears were streaming down his furrowed cheeks.
“Me, Yandamana!” he said, laying his hand on his breast, without, however, removing his soul-piercing eyes from mine.
As I did not know what to say, I nodded in assent.
“ You, Wynd-yardyah 1 ” he continued, putting his hand on my shoulder, “you my boy; me mind-um you.”
Fresh as I was to the customs and traditions of the Australian natives, it took Sam some little time to make me understand that poor old Yandamana regarded me as his long lost son. Many years ago this only boy, called
288
HARRY TREVERTON.
Wynd-yardyah, had died, causing the father great grief. He had murdered, as is their tribal custom, several youths of the same age, belonging to neighbouring tribes, in the effort to assuage his grief.
When a native feels sorrow for the death of a relative he imagines that the spirit of the dead person is tormenting him, and that it can .only be appeased by the sacrifice of a life under conditions as similar as possible to its own in another tribe. So poor old Yandamana had stalked and slain several promising youths without in any way lessening his overwhelming grief for his own boy’s loss. At last he had persuaded himself that the youth must have come back to life again as a white man, for they often say, “Black fellow first time dead, by’m-bye jump up white fellow.” And now he felt convinced that I stood before him as Wynd-yardyah in a white skin, and the only thing was to convince me of this metamorphosis. My nod of assent had quite satisfied him, and henceforth I was to be as his son to him. I came to know several instances of a similar kind, and some where a white man had been claimed in kindred by quite a host of black relations.
In my case I had reason to be thankful that this strong delusion had seized upon the poor old man, for the same evening Sam rode back to the homestead, and I should have been left in absolute solitude had not my new-found
BANISHMENT.
289
relative hovered near me, ready to protect and help me with food and counsel if only I would condescend to ask him. In spite of the ludicrous side of the situation, I confess that old Yandamana’s tall figure was some comfort to me as I stood alone in the forest, in front of my miserable hut, feeling that I had indeed entered on a place of banishment and exile from everything which could make life endurable.
19
CHAPTER XXVII.
AT DEATH’S DOOR.
Y^S; after Sam had ridden away, and I had taken full possession of my little hut, from whence I could hear the distant monotonous chanting of the natives as they sat round their fire, out of sight, I felt lonely enough, but I had yet to realize the full meaning of the word “alone.”
Morning after morning I rose with the sun and followed my sheep into the bush, where they found their feed. My own meals were not difficult to prepare, as they only consisted of tea, damper—and kangaroo flesh, when the natives brought it to me.
Old Yandamana was as good as his word, and always accompanied me when I took my flock out to feed, and whilst I watched them he “ minded ” me. I always gave him some of my tea and damper, and in return he took care to claim and obtain for me a supply of the kangaroo meat which the natives brought in for their own support every day.
Week after week passed over my head in this dreary and monotonous fashion ; it could hardly be called living, but was rather existence under the most primitive conditions.
290
AT DEATH'S DOOT.
291
I used to call old Yandamana “ Daddy,” at which he was greatly pleased, taking it as an acknowledgment on my part of the relationship. A hundred times a day he would tap himself on the breast and say “ Me daddy! ” like the strange old baby that he was.
In sheer despair at the silence and solitude in which my young life seemed drifting helplessly on, I used sometimes to try to exchange ideas with my old companion, but the result was invariably hearty peals of laughter on Daddy’s part at the confusion and discomfiture of any such attempt. It amused and interested me sometimes when, having hidden myself according to his instructions, I would see how surely and cleverly he would stalk and slay a kangaroo or a wallaby. It seemed like magic to a raw English lad the way in which the long, slender spears went quivering through the air, to stick, with unerring aim, into the body of the unsuspecting animal.
One day when Daddy and I returned to camp in the evening as usual, we found the camp deserted and kangaroo dogs tied up.
“Far away walk,” said Daddy, stretching forth his arms in the direction of the setting sun.
So it was, and the old man and I were utterly alone.
The forest seemed very still and quiet that night, for instead of the distant sounds, distinct through the clear, still 19—2
292
HARRY TREVERTON.
air, of women’s laughter and children’s shouts, all was absolutely mute. A sort of terror crept into my heart at the deathlike stillness, and I tried to convey as best I could an entreaty to Daddy not to desert me too.
“ Me mind-um you ; me catch-um kangaroo,” he answered cheerfully, with many emphatic nods of his head, and I almost loved the old man for his constancy.
So, literally, as the nursery rhyme has it, “ Daddy went a-hunting” in the mornings whilst I fed my flock, but he always turned up by evening, and “ minded me ” as he promised. In this fashion day after day passed away, until I began to feel as though I were working out a long sentence of solitary confinement, but, alas! I had still to learn what solitude meant.
Sam had been out from the so-called “ home-station ” once or twice with rations, and his brief visits gave old Daddy and me quite a pleasurable sense of excitement, it is true that I could not get much news out of him, but he and Daddy had chatted and laughed so heartily that a sort of second-hand mirth had been communicated to me by listening to their gleeful cackle. These “angel-visits” were, however, few and far between, and Daddy and I used soon to be left once more to our solitude.
As time went on I began to weary of eating kangaroo flesh, often rank and coarse if the animal were an old one.
AT1 DEATH’S DOOT.
293
I often lived for three or four days on nothing but tea and damper, and my allowance of that—narrow to begin with—was lessened by sharing it with old Daddy. How I longed for a mutton chop! But such a delicacy was indeed forbidden, and therefore it was often a case of taking or leaving the kangaroo meat, and I constantly left it.
My clothes and boots now began to wear out, and at last I was driven to make myself gaiters and sandals out of raw kangaroo-hide, and I actually manufactured a cap out of the same material. I was very proud of my handiwork, and my old mate admired it prodigiously, but I must have looked—and I know I felt—very much like Robinson Crusoe. Daddy, seeing the dilapidated state of my wardrobe, and mindful of the cold nights, made me, most skilfully using a splinter for a needle and finely-drawn-out tendons for thread, a grand cloak of kangaroo skins. Had Mr. Darwin seen me of a morning in these Esau-like garments, he would indeed have thought he had got hold of the missing link—or at least a fine specimen of the primeval man!
One day, on returning to the camp, I found Daddy in earnest conversation with two strange natives, who had evidently just arrived, and I could not help observing that the old man glanced with a curious expression at me from
294
HARRY TREVERTON.
time to time. At last, in a very low, half-ashamed, tone, he said, “ Me walk.”
“ What! ” I exclaimed, terror-stricken at the idea of being left in absolute solitude, “you walk-away, Daddy ? ”
“ Me walk-away,” repeated the old fellow, sadly, and he held out a piece of wood, about six inches long, to me. It had been smoothed, and was covered with rude hieroglyphic outlines, traced with a sharp-pointed splinter of burnt wood. This was a native message stick, or letter, brought to Daddy by the two new arrivals. They had explained to him its contents, and according to tribal custom the summons on that 'fragment of wood, with its absurd attempts at drawing, could no more be disregarded than could the Fiery Cross to the warlike Highlander a hundred years ago.
“ When you come back, Daddy ? ” I asked, anxiously.
The old man in reply took hold of his wrinkled thumb and said, “ Sleep,” and so on with all his fingers until he had repeated the word “ sleep ” ten times, with great gravity and earnestness. This he did ten times to signify a ten days’ absence, but as Daddy could only count up to ten, I did not feel at all sure that his arithmetic could be depended on, and that I might really expect him back within a fortnight at most. I turned away, sick at heart, and went back to my flock.
AT DEATH'S DOOT.
295
When I returned to my hut at sunset that evening, the two kangaroo dogs which Daddy had left tied up were howling so dismally, that, had I not cut them adrift, I really believe they would have driven me distracted. The instant they were free, off they bounded, barking joyously, and Laddie and I were left alone. “ Poor old boy! ” I said to him, patting his sleek head, “you are about the only true friend I have left in the world! ” and the dog looked so intelligently and kindly in response, that I felt his mute sympathy to be a real consolation to me.
All count of days had long ceased with me, and not only of days, but of weeks and even months. I knew the summer was passing away, but there was only the wet winter weather with its long cold nights to look forward to. As I followed my flock day after day, tall and gaunt in stature, with long and unkempt hair and beard, and my kangaroo skin clothing, I felt as though it were all part of a long horrible dream. Of course I could not help brooding over my situation, and the solitude and terrible monotony of my life made my thoughts morbid and gloomy to the last degree. The memory of Lily and her sweet sunny face was the one ray of light in my mental prison-house, and, strange to say, it is none the less absolutely true, that although she seemed as distant as a star from my actual life and surroundings, I never quite lost sight of the
296
/TARRY TREVERTON.
wings of the angel, Hope, who always had Lily’s eyes and floating golden hair.
The memory of that terrible time, when my loneliness was intensified by even Daddy’s absence, is necessarily blurred and indistinct, but some fragments of the days stand out with awful clearness, and I think they must have been the moments when my mind gave way, happily only for moments, and I crossed, as Dickens says somewhere, “ the slight boundary line between sanity and insanity.” For instance, I see—as though it were a picture of some one else—myself crouched on the ground, with parched lips and distended, wide-open eyes, lifting the sand high in air, and letting it trickle slowly down again through my fingers, whilst I murmur, “Earth to earth, dust to dust, ashes to ashes.” And I had reason even in my madness, for did not my youth, and all that made life bearable, lie, as it were, in a grave at my feet ? Then, again, Laddie, much against his will, must needs be pressed into the ghastly game, and he would be ordered to lie still whilst his wretched, despairing master, sunk almost below the brutes for lack of courage and hope, poured the sand over his glossy coat and mumbled fragments of the Burial Service. Once, as I was going on in this dreadful way, a sort of ray of manly hope and a better spirit flashed over my darkened mind, and I cried, remembering the psalm I had
AT DEATH'S DOOT.
297
learned at my mother’s knee (was it in another stage of existence ?)—“ 0 God ! hide not Thy face from me, lest I be like unto those that go down into the pit.”
Poor Laddie used to look at me with pitying eyes, and lick my hands and face, and I often used to fling my arms round his neck, and cry like a child, sobbing out that I “would be good.” I meant that I would trust in God, and not despair utterly.
But it was hard work ! Daddy must surely have been gone ten days—or was it twenty ? I had no count of time ; to-day was as yesterday, and as to-morrow would be, and I was still alone. If Sam had come with rations I would have sent a message, begging Wilcox to release me from this terrible existence, but that could not be for a while, as I had plenty of tea, flour, etc., enough to last some time longer. There was, however, one change at hand; it was going to rain, and even that would be something new and something to be thankful for.
Whilst I was out with my flock, the very next day, the rain came down in torrents, and as I turned homewards I could not help laughing aloud at my own miserable appearance, for the drenched fur of my kangaroo cloak and cap presented a most absurd and “drowned cat” sort of look.
But my laughter, wretched as it was, did not last long, for when I reached camp, the first thing I perceived was that my
HARRY TREVERTON.
298
fire had been fairly washed out by the deluge of rain. The hollow where it had been wont to smoulder during my absence was filled, like a pool, by water. And I had no matches, no tinder, and no means within my knowledge of kindling a fresh one.
It was truly an awful moment, for, besides the absence of its friendly warmth and company, starvation stared me in the face. My last piece of damper had been finished at noon, and there was no means now of baking any more. I tried to eat some of the flour raw, but it turned to dough in my mouth, and could not be swallowed. Even Laddie would not venture on that experiment. I determined on the morrow to kill a sheep to save Laddie’s life as well as my own, but I should have to eat its flesh raw.
As the sun went down it became desperately cold, and my teeth began to chatter. In order to get some warmth into my chilled limbs before turning in, I called Laddie, and set off for a run. Laddie came, but very reluctantly, for I am sure he thought I was mad, and I thought so myself when, on returning to the hut after a brisk sort of jog-trot for a mile or so, I beheld, actually and truly, a bright fire blazing merrily away near the accustomed spot, and old Daddy squatting by it, throwing on fresh branches, as though he had never been a yard away from it. I rushed at the old man, dragged him up, seized him by the waist, and waltzed with him round and
AT DEATH'S DOOR.
= 99
round the fire as though he were a beautiful young lady, Laddie barking furiously all the time, as well he might. When I let Daddy go, I sank on the wet ground, and laughed and cried like a baby.
The old man evidently thought something was wrong with me, and tried to pacify me, at last inducing me to cook some meat, and bake a damper. I could not swallow any solid food, but felt deeply grateful for a long drink of hot strong tea. I turned into the hut and soon fell asleep ; but the fire was still blazing, and Daddy yet crouching by it, when I awoke, racked with pains darting and shooting all through my body and limbs, and with a head heavy as lead, and full of pain. I could scarcely move, but had sense enough to consider that I should probably become worse and more helpless, so, whilst it was yet possible, I dragged myself up, with many groans, from my miserable lair, sought for and found a scrap of paper and a pencil, which I had carefully concealed in the thatch of my hut, and wrote on it, “ Please come at once; I am very ill; perhaps dying.” I signed my name as legibly as I could, and waking old Daddy, managed to convey to him how bad I was, and that he must “Wilcox walk,” with the “paper talk,” showing him the bit of paper, and making signs that he must carefully preserve it. The good old fellow evidently saw how desperately ill I was—as, indeed, my shaking frame and burning hand could have told him. He looked
300 NARR Y TRE YER TON.
earnestly at me, called out loudly, with uplifted hands, a few friendly incantations to keep off evil spirits from me during his absence, and then, taking his spears in one hand, and a fire-stick in the other, he started for my employer’s house, with a promise to be back when the sun was a “little bit jump up.” He returned, as he said he would, early next morning, but I never saw my poor old friend again, for by the time help reached me I was past recognizing anyone, and raving wildly in the delirium of a raging fever.
CHAPTER XXVIII.
MY LOVE AND l!
''J'TIE interval which had elapsed between Daddy’s leaving me and his return could never be measured by me as to time, for every hour of it was passed in a raging fever. I have gleams of memory in which I seem to hear myself shouting loudly, or see myself struggling to rise and crawl out of the hut; but when help came I was, so they told me, lying as though dead, perfectly unconscious, in a sort of lethargic stupor or sleep. At all events, I was so absolutely insensible to change or movement that when I opened my eyes again it was to see, by a shaded light, and with the deepest surprise and bewilderment, that the squalid hut seemed to have expanded into a comfortable room, my rushes and blankets changed into a real, comfortable bed, and Daddy himself—most wonderful transformation of all— had turned into an elderly and white—that was what fairly puzzled me—woman, who sat dozing in an arm-chair. A table, with glasses and medicine-bottles and jugs, stood near, and whilst I was still wondering how I could get a drink to moisten my parched mouth, it all passed away again, and I must have fallen into a deep sleep.
301
302
MA A’AY TAEYERTON.
When I awoke it was daylight, and, to my intense satisfaction, all the novel and inexplicable surroundings of my changed condition were still there, and had not proved a dream, as I felt sure they would. At the first faint sound I made; a man, who was looking out of the window, turned hastily round, but as it seemed to be quite impossible that he could be Summers, my first and kindest friend, who was cautiously advancing towards my bed, I closed my eyes again to try and keep his visionary presence as long as possible with me. But as the bed was certainly real, I felt a weak sort of speculation arising within me as to whether Summers might not be real also, so I made a hoarse noise, intended for his name, at which he hastily came towards me, with the oddest expression on his face of half fright and half pleasure.
“ Do you know me, dear old boy ? ” he asked, in a whisper nearly as hoarse and agitated as my own, taking my hand— was that white claw really my own brown strong hand ?—in both his own.
I made another tremendous effort to get out his name, and as he bent his head close to my ear he must have heard it, for the kind face lit up, and he said, in his old cheery voice, “Yes, Harry, it’s me right enough ! And how do you feel now ? ”
The only feeling I was conscious of was thirst, so I mur-
mured, “Very thirsty.”
MY LOVE AND I!
3°3
In an instant he held the spout of a feeding-cup to my mouth, and I discovered that I was actually too weak to raise my head, and after a long drink of some delicious liquid I dropped off to sleep again.
My next awakening brought me more strength, and after that I began to mend hourly, thanks to good nursing and good food, in infinitesimal portions at first. At first I was quite content to accept the marvels which surrounded me without question, but with strength came curiosity, and at last I demanded to know how, why, and when I came there. Summers smiled, and sat down comfortably near my bed, and, taking my hand in both his, as though to lend me some of his own strength and vitality, said :
“ One morning, when I was in my office as usual, at Sandtown, an old man, giving his name as James Ramshaw, came in, and, without any preamble, asked me if I knew where you were. This was sufficiently startling to begin with, and became more so as he went on, saying, ‘ What I want to know for is that if I can find him it’ll be a fiver for me and a fortune for him; and more than that, I’d like to do the young chap a good turn.’ Well, you may depend on it, I pricked up my ears at this, though it sounded as wild to me as I can see it does to you, but Jemmy’s story was quite connected, and he stuck steadily to it. Of course I asked him what he meant, and he said, ‘Well, you see, sir, this is how it stands. Lawyer
3 °4
naeey tee fee eon
Parks sends for me t’other day, and he asks me my name, and when I’d answered to it he holds out a paper, and says, “Do you know the signaturs on that ’ere document ? ” So I looks at it, and I says, “Yes, I do; one on ’em is my old master’s, Mr. Remison’s ; one is John Shaw’s, as was a-workin’ for ’im ; and one on ’em is mine.” “ How do you know that ? ” asks he, as sharp as you please. “ How do I know it ? ” says I; “well, I know’em because I wrote mine myself, and I seed the other two write theirs ; and, more than that, I can swear to that blot, for I made it myself. I never writes my name above oncet in a twelvemonth or so, and then I be bound to blot it. And that’s how I know this paper in pertikler.” “Very good, my man,” says he. “ Now you tell me what’s in this paper.” “ I can’t do that,” says I, “ but I know it’s a will, and that’s all I can say about it.” “Very good,” says he again. “ I believe you were for some time in Mr. Remison’s service ? ” So I told him I’d been for eight years with him as foreman. “Then maybe you’ve heard him talk about his friends in England ? ” says he. So I up and I told him as I’d heard the master talk scores of times about a Mr. Trever-ton and his son Harry, as was to come out to the colony, and did come out in the Sea Nymph ; but as the poor old gentleman had died a month afore he lands, this ’ere Mr. Harry had gone up country to look for a job. “ What! ” says Mr. Parks quite eager-like; “is Harry Treverton in the colony? That
MY LOVE AND I!
3°5
is a good hearing! You find him for me, Jemmy, and I’ll guv you five pound. That very will as how you witnessed,” says he, “ is all in his favour, and at this ’ere moment he’s the owner of Spring Vale, and a good bit o’ money in the bank besides, somewhere over five thousand pound.” ’ ”
When the story had reached this point, it sounded to me, lying there still so weak and ill, as though Summers had either caught the infection of my delirium, and as if he were romancing to me, or else I must still be out of my senses and dreaming the whole story. In a trembling voice, and with outstretched hands, I implored Summers to tell me if the thing were real or no.
“ It’s all as true as Gospel,” he cried, “ and as right as the bank! Don’t you go and interrupt the thread of my story. Where was I ? ”
“At the five thousand pounds,” I faltered, feeling quite ashamed of my credulity.
“Ah, yes! Well, old Jemmy said, ‘And, begging your pardon, sir, I asks the lawyer, “ May I hinquire why the young gent don’t get his fortin at oncet, stead o’ tramping round the country a-lookin’ for jobs and sich like ? ” Measter Parks, he smiles, and he says, “ That’s a werry sensible question, Jemmy, and I’ll tell you why: because, in place o’ giving’ his papers to his lawyer to take care on for him, like a sensible man, Mr. Remison, he thought proper to hide them in a secret
£0
3°6
HARRY TREVERTON.
drawer, where they’ve only just been found by the man I’d put in charge of the property. Of course I shall advertise for the young man directly, and in the meantime here’s a sovereign for your information; if you let me know within a month where Mr. Harry Treverton can be found, I’ll make it up to five pound for you. Good morning.” So out I goes and comes to you, Mr. Summers, thinking we might find the young chap ’atween us.’
“This was very good news,” continued Summers; “but as I wanted to be sure of it, I hired a horse directly, and rode up to town, and looked up old Parks. He stuck to every word he’d said to old Jemmy, and not only that, but guaranteed all my expenses. Not that I wanted anything of that sort to make me start off to look for you, old boy! I got six weeks’ leave of absence and set off on your tracks. I traced you quite easily to Running River Station (which is only-twenty miles off), then I lost the trail for a bit, picked it up at Wilcox’s, only to hear that a young white man was desperate bad at an outlying hut, got hold of a trap and a paii' of strong horses, on the chance of its being you, and found it zvas you, sure enough! My word, Harry, I thought Spring Vale and the five thou’ in the bank had turned up a day too late when I first saw you. An old black fellow was squatting near you, brushing the flies off your face with a bit of a branch, and there was some muddy water in a pannikin,
MY LOVE A NE I!
307
and that was all the sick-room nursing and comfort you had, my poor old boy ! You were as gaunt as any living skeleton at a fair, as weak as a baby, and as mad as a hatter. It was only your being so weak that made us able to get hold of you at all, but we did manage to hoist you into the trap, and to bring you—a good deal more dead than alive, I can tell you —here.”
“ Where’s here ? ” I asked, feeling uncommonly inclined to cry.
“ Dobbs’s to be sure,” Summers answered, cheerfully, pressing the hand he held, but looking away, as though he guessed I was struggling with my tears. “ I knew Mrs. Dobbs was a very good sort of body, for I had asked about all the neighbours when I was at Running River, for I meant to have a try at all of ’em to find you, and I heard that Dobbs had his place very neat and comfortable, and so it is, and uncommon lucky for you, old chap, that there was such a shelter for you within reach. Mrs. Dobbs has been like a mother to you, and it’s her nursing, under God’s blessing, that has pulled you through, for we couldn’t get hold of the ghost of a doctor for you.”
“And where’s poor old Daddy?” I asked, now fairly breaking down, and crying like a child at the thought of my faithful old companion, to whose rude care I probably owed the flicker of life which was left in me when Summers found me.
20—2
HARRY TREVERTON.
308
“ I have not the least idea,” said Summers ; “we could not make him understand where we were taking you, and he only shook his head and mumbled, ‘Walk away.’ I thought he would have turned up before now to ask for some baccy and ■flour for taking care of you, but no one has seen anything of the old chap. You see, Harry, it’s taken us all our time to watch that you did not give us the slip, my boy, so I, for one, have not thought of anything beyond keeping life in you from hour to hour.”
I could only press Summers’ hand in silent gratitude, and register a vow that I would seek for old Daddy everywhere, high and low, and find him if I could, and keep him in both baccy and flour, to say nothing of blankets and tea, so long •as he lived. But all my efforts were in vain. I offered rewards, which resulted in many old savages being brought to see me, but in none of them did either Laddie or I recognize our faithful old Daddy and follower, and I have, up to date, no clue whatever as to what became of my devoted nurse and friend.
It was rather more than a fortnight before I was strong enough to bear the two days’ easy travelling which lay between my sick bed and Running River Station, and during that time I induced Summers to ride over and bring me back news of their welfare. I think his report did me more good even than Mrs. Dobbs’ “kitchen physic,” as she called her
MY LOVE AMD I!
3°9
wonderful broths and stews, and it was with a thankful and joyful heart that I drew my first cheque (fancy my having a cheque-book, and money at the bank to draw against!) in Mrs. Dobbs’ favour. No money, as I told her, could ever repay her kindness to me, and to her homely skill and devoted care I owed it that I could draw cheques at all. This was the only argument which induced her to accept the bit of coloured paper which I pressed into her hand during our adieux, and we drove off, one fine morning, still laden with good things to eat on the way, and with my kind nurse’s injunctions to “take care of myself” ringing in my ears.
How my heart beat as we drove through the slip rails where I had told Lily I loved her, and how horribly weak and ridiculously spooney I felt! However, thank God, I was no longer a pauper, nor was there now any disgrace in Lily’s love for me. I thought, with the pardonable pride of a boy, of how I had won her love, and how we had plighted our troth when our attachment seemed visionary and hopeless; and the remembrance of Lily’s indifference to my worldly circumstances gave my new-found wealth—for the modest competence to which I had succeeded seemed “ wealth beyond the dreams of avarice ” in comparison with my recent destitution—an increased value in my eyes. Nor was my money only precious to me as smoothing the way for Lily to become my wife. I had indulged in many plans for helping forward the
HARRY TREVERTON.
310 dear ones at home, which plans must always have remained dreams but for Mr. Remison’s goodness to me.
I did not realise that my tramps and troubles were fairly over until I had not only been warmly welcomed by Ned and Mrs. Reeves, but had been allowed a precious half-hour with Lily, in which we settled our lives so far as poor mortals may. Our plans, however, were not allowed to mature so rapidly as we had intended, for neither her mother nor uncle would hear of the immediate marriage we contemplated. I was much too young, they said, and so was Lily; nor could we wring from them anything better than a cordial consent to an engagement between us, to be brought to an end by our marriage when I became of age. So I take leave of my readers, standing at the slip rail, with Lily’s hand in mine, saying good-bye to her—but not the despairing farewell we last took of each other. We grumble a little at the prudence and delay of our elders, but it would be ungrateful to the merciful Providence who has so blessed us to repine seriously-For I am going to begin a series of improvements and preparations, every one of which will have for their object the better fitting of Spring Vale for its fair young mistress in a few years’ time. Ned has faithfully promised to bring his sister and niece to pay me a visit as soon as ever the station work will allow him to leave home, and I am to feel certain of a hearty welcome at Running River whenever I can come

MY LOVE AND I! 
there. Summers is of course going to my new home with me as my first guest; and so, with love and friendship both awaiting me, I am, as I stand with bared head and Lily’s hand in mine, the happiest man in all the fair young land which holds my new home. We both look up at the stars, but our hearts go out beyond them in deep thankfulness to the Divinity who hath shaped our ends in such a marvellous and blessed fashion.
THE END.